Sentiment Analysis and Topic Extraction of
the Twitter Network of #Prayforparis
Miyoung Chong
College of Information
University of North Texas, Denton, TX
chongmiyoung@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
Social media includes a copious amount of sentimentembodied
sentences. Sentiment is described as “a personal
belief or judgment that is not founded on proof or
certainty,” which may depict the emotional state of the user,
such as happy, glad, terrified, miserable, or the author’s
viewpoint on a topic. In social science, emotions and
sentiment make up a significant part of social life and are
interconnected with social relationships. When
experiencing emotions, people want to reveal those
emotions to other people. This study seeks to validate
whether the Emotional Contagion social theory holds true
in microblogging data. This theory implies that related
people tend to have more similar sentiments or opinions.
Motivated by this sociological observation, the study
explores the sentiment-semantics of the Twitter network of
#prayforparis through sentiment analysis and topic
extraction. Social Network Analysis was conducted using
NodeXL to investigate the research questions. The study
implemented R for conducting sentiment analysis and
generating word clouds with the collected data. The study
also conducted content analysis of tweets through topic
extraction by applying the most recent version of SAS
Enterprise Miner (13.2). In conclusion, the results
confirmed the Emotional Contagion Theory in the Twitter
network of #prayforparis.
Keywords
sentiment analysis, text mining, social media, emotional
contagion theory, hashtag, Twitter, semantic analysis, R,
word clouds, #prayforparis
INTRODUCTION
Web 2.0 users can participate, collaborate, and create
virtual online communities. Microblogs, such as Twitter,
became user-generated information-abundant resources,
because users began sharing information and opinions in
diverse online events and domains, including breaking
news, celebrity gossip, product reviews, and discussions
about recent incidents – the Orlando massacre in June 2016
was a popular discussion topic, for example. On Twitter,
which has 310 million monthly active users (Twitter.com),
users vividly exchange information through tweets that are
up to 140 characters in length. Twitter can deliver messages
in real time from anywhere and anyone despite the
diversified user backgrounds such as varying religion or
political inclination and the level of education or
civilization.
One of most apparent characteristics of tweets are the
networked user relationships. Connections among the
messages can be demonstrated through a “user-message
matrix” and a “user-user interaction matrix” except the
content information (Hu, Tang, Tang, & Liu, 2013, p. 537).
On Twitter, information or opinions about news and
incidents are predominantly organized and shared through
hashtags with the # symbol. The hashtag is a communitydriven
practice for putting on another factors and metadata
to tweets by promoting folksonomy. Hashtags are generated
by users as a method to classify information and highlight
topics. Through substantial adoption of hashtags, Twitter
became more expressive of and popular with users (Wang,
Wei, Liu, Zhou, & Zhang, 2011).
Social media includes a copious amount of sentimentembodied
sentences. Sentiment is described as “a personal
belief or judgment that is not founded on proof or certainty”
(WordNet 2.1 definitions), which may depict the emotional
state of the user, such as happy, glad, terrified, miserable, or
the author’s viewpoint on a topic – for example, “A is
wonderful” or “I dislike B,” etc. Sentiment analysis, also
called opinion mining, aims to discover whether the
polarity of a textual corpus, a collection of written texts,
leans towards positive, negative, or neutral sentiments.
In social science, emotions and sentiment make up a
significant part of social life and are interconnected with
social relationships. When experiencing emotions, people
want to reveal those emotions to other people (Keltner &
Bonanno, 1997). Furthermore, people are likely to receive
others’ emotions through non-verbal reactions, which have
ASIST 2016, October 14-18, 2016, Copenhagen, Denmark.
All Rights Reserved (c) 2016 Miyoung Chong
been defined as “emotional contagion” in social sciences
(Hatfield, Cacioppo, & Rapson, 1994). Emotional
contagion can be important for relationships between
individuals, because “it fosters behavioral synchrony and
the tracking of the feelings of others moment-to-moment
even when individuals are not explicitly attending to this
information” (Hatfield et al., 1994). Fowler and Christakis
reported the diffusion of happiness – a form of emotional
contagion – in a social network (Fowler & Christakis,
2008). Recently, researchers described the appearance of
sentiment diffusion (Miller, Sathi, Wiesenthal, Leskovec, &
Potts, 2011) in online networks of social media based on
the theory of emotional contagion between companions.
The results of analysis confirm that the Emotional
Contagion theory understood through the perspective of
sentiment (Hatfield et al., 1994) could be helpful for
sentiment analysis. The theory reveals that the sentiments
of two messages posted by friends are more likely to be
similar then those of two randomly selected messages, and
this conclusion is derived from offline surveys and
conversations.
This study seeks to validate whether the Emotional
Contagion social theory holds true in microblogging data
(Hu et al., 2013). This theory implies that related people
tend to have more similar sentiments or opinions.
Motivated by this sociological observation, the study
explores the sentiment-semantics of the Twitter network of
#prayforparis through sentiment analysis and topic
extraction. The purpose of this study is to discover the
answers of the following research questions:
RQ 1. How does the Twitter network of #prayforparis
demonstrate the emotional contagion among connected
users?
RQ 2. What are the most prevalent topics in the Twitter
network of #prayforparis?
The main contribution of this paper can be summarized as
follows: this study analyzed a world event organized by the
hashtag feature in a Twitter network and investigated the
Emotional Contagion theory through sentiment analysis,
using the most recent version of R (3.3.1) for the sentiment
analysis and word cloud and latent semantic analysis to
analyze contents of the network and provided potential
application and methodological challenges by adopting a
novel method, SAS enterprise miner (SAS EM), for topic
extraction in the Twitter network #prayforparis. The
remainder of this paper is features a discussion of related
works followed by the presentation of data collection and
evaluation measures, and in the final section, results are
provided.
RELATED WORKS
Extensive studies have been conducted regarding the
various aspects of Twitter networks, including, for example,
its network topology, the relationships and kinds of
messages among users, the information dissemination in the
Twitter network, the trustworthiness of information, and its
potential as a predictor of sentiment. Also, Twitter’s
influence based on the semantic differences regarding the
tenacity of a hashtag has been discussed.
Sentiment analysis can be conducted at different levels,
such as the document, sentence, word, or feature level. In
the case of Twitter, word level analysis best fits that
environment, which allows users to exchange limited
characters of information. Cross-examination of the
literature verifies that the evaluation measures of
mechanically-annotating sentiment at the word level are
categorized into two areas: “dictionary-based approaches”
and “corpus-base approaches” (Kumar & Sebastian, 2012,
p. 372).
Recently, researchers analyzed Twitter activities and
reported that more than 80 percent of users either post
status updates to their followers or spread information
regarding their daily experiences (Thelwall, Buckley, &
Paltoglou, 2011). The study links these to the group of
communications organized by the hashtag and uses textmining
techniques to provide semantic characteristics of the
#prayforparis network.
DATA COLLECTION
In order to investigate the research questions above, SNA
was conducted using NodeXL (Hansen, Shneiderman, &
Smith, 2011). NodeXL can create visual network diagrams
of collections of actors (vertices), estimate the network
impact (e.g., betweenness centrality or page rank) of a
single actor on others, and retrieve information on a large
scale (Hansen et al., 2011). Tweets were collected by
applying #prayforparis through the Twitter application
programming interface (API) at 11 am on November 17,
2015, which was four days after the incident.
In this study, a total of 19,592 tweets (vertices) generated a
total of 20,295 edges (relations between tweets). By using
NodeXL, four different types of Twitter edges, which
include retweet, replies- to, mention, and tweet, and
following and follower relationships among users, were
extracted. The collected Twitter data was unstructured and
not suitable for analysis. Therefore, the data was prepared
through a cleaning process that removed unnecessary parts
of the data such as unusual symbols.
METHOD
The study implemented R for conducting sentiment analysis
and generating word clouds with the collected data. R is a
functional language for computers and environment for
statistical calculation, visual graphics, and unified chambers
of software provisions for data manipulation (The R
foundation, 2016). The study used the twitteR, the plyr,
stringr, ROAuth and the ggplot2 libraries in the R software
package version 3.3.1 to conduct the quantitative sentiment
score. Word clouds were also created to learn the dominant
and emerging topics of the Twitter network of
#prayforparis.
The study also conducted content analysis of tweets through
topic extraction by applying the most recent version of SAS
Enterprise Miner (13.2). SAS EM employs latent semantic
analysis (LSA). LSA was introduced in 1990 in the Journal
of the American Society for Information Science
(Deerwester, Dumais, Furnas, Landauer, & Harshman,
1990).
LSA was defined as “as new method for automatic indexing
and retrieval” that takes “advantage of implicit higher-order
structure in the association of terms with documents
(‘semantic structure’) in order to improve the detection of
relevant documents on the basis of terms found in queries.”
LSA is based on the premise that meaningfully related
words will appear in similar text, and subjects or topics can
be extracted from the text and a statistical instrument that
calculates data with an almost identical method for factor
analysis (Evangelopoulos, Ashton, Winson-Geideman, &
Roulac, 2015). After the sentiment analysis and the creation
of word cloud through R, the study manually filtered the
resulting tweets to obtain a set of 10 meaningful topics
through the process of text parsing, text filtering, text
clustering, and topic extraction in SAS EM.
RESULTS
Figure 1 displays sentiment score of all tweets in the
network of #prayforparis. The histogram presents an
asymmetrical graph by indicating more negative sentiment.
In the previous analysis of the network, Justin Bieber had
the largest number of indegree, which illustrates his
popularity, and his indegree (4,196) solely occupies more
than 20% of the edge relationships (20,295) in the entire
network. Justine Bieber also holds highest betweenness
centrality with 51,772,745.861, which means he is located
in the most centralized position and reinforces the social
connection within the network of #prayforparis.
On November 16, 2015, Justin Bieber posted a tweet about
the Paris attack and the loss of his friend, Thomas. His
tweet was retweeted more than 50,000 times and received
77,000 likes in the few weeks after his post. By June 2016,
the tweet had been retweeted more than 51,000 times and
received 81,000 likes. Therefore, it is not surprising that
figure 2 displays highly negative sentiment. The Word
Cloud of Justin Bieber’s ego network demonstrated the
dominant character of Justin Bieber and his related tweets
by following the connections with his fans and fan
websites.
On the other hand, figure 3 presents an interesting
sentiment score. Though the Paris terrorist attack in 2015
was one of the most horrific incidents in Paris, including
the Charlie Hebdo shooting, the sentiment scores present
strongly neutral and a balanced graph image. The Word
Cloud of all tweets with the exclusion of tweets in Justin
Bieber’s ego network clearly presents a nearly even
distribution of topics when Justin-Bieber-related tweets are
excluded.
Figure 1. Sentiment score of all tweets
Figure 2. Sentiment score of tweets of Justin Bieber’s
ego network
Figure 3. Sentiment score of all tweets with the
exclusion of tweets in Justin Bieber’s ego network
The procedure of topic extraction in SAS EM includes text
parsing, text filtering, and text clustering, and ten topics
were extracted from the corpus. The topics provide
important detailed information discussion content in the
Twitter network of #prayforparis. Figure 5 shows that a
large number of users also talked about the massive French
fighter jet attack targeting Islamic State’s stronghold in
Syria. The last figure describes the number of documents by
topics with the exclusion of tweets in Justin Bieber’s ego
network. Topic ID 8 is about the powerful tribute to the
victims of the attack during the soccer game between
England and France on November 17, 2015.
Figure 4. Word Cloud of all tweets
Figure 5. The ten topics from all tweets
Figure 6. Number of documents by topics with the
exclusion of tweets of Justin Bieber’s ego network
CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the results confirmed the emotional
contagion theory in the Twitter network of #prayforparis,
because the grief Justin Bieber shared and diffused through
his online community of fans and fan websites strongly
connected followers and following relationships on
Twitter. In addition, the most prevalent topics of the
network included condolences to the victims of the attack
(e.g. Justin Bieber’s friend), John (Lennon), peace, love,
REFERENCES
Deerwester, S., Dumais, S. T., Furnas, G. W., Landauer, T.
K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by latent semantic
analysis. Journal of the American society for
information science, 41(6), 391.
Evangelopoulos, N., Ashton, T., Winson-Geideman, K., &
Roulac, S. (2015). Latent Semantic Analysis and Real
Estate Research: Methods and Applications. Journal of
Real Estate Literature, 23(2), 353-380.
Fowler, J. H., & Christakis, N. A. (2008). Dynamic spread
of happiness in a large social network: longitudinal
analysis over 20 years in the Framingham Heart Study.
Bmj, 337, a2338.
Hansen, D.L., Shneiderman, B., & Smith, M.A. (2011).
Analyzing social media networks with NodeXL: Insights
from a connected world. Boston, MA: Morgan
Kaufmann.
Hatfield, E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Rapson, R. L. (1994).
Emotional contagion. Cambridge university press.
Hu, X., Tang, L., Tang, J., & Liu, H. (2013, February).
Exploiting social relations for sentiment analysis in
microblogging. In Proceedings of the sixth ACM
international conference on Web search and data
mining (pp. 537-546). ACM.
Keltner, D., & Bonanno, G. A. (1997). A study of laughter
and dissociation: distinct correlates of laughter and
smiling during bereavement. Journal of personality and
social psychology, 73(4), 687.
Kumar, A., & Sebastian, T. M. (2012). Sentiment analysis
on twitter. IJCSI International Journal of Computer
Science Issues, 9(4), 372.
Miller, M., Sathi, C., Wiesenthal, D., Leskovec, J., & Potts,
C. (2011, July). Sentiment Flow Through Hyperlink
Networks. In ICWSM.
Thelwall, M., Buckley, K., & Paltoglou, G. (2011).
Sentiment in Twitter events. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 62(2),
406-418.
Wang, X., Wei, F., Liu, X., Zhou, M., & Zhang, M. (2011,
October). Topic sentiment analysis in twitter: a graphbased
hashtag sentiment classification approach. In
Proceedings of the 20th ACM international conference
on Information and knowledge management (pp. 1031-
1040). ACM.
pray, and Paris is burning.
Copyright of Proceedings of the Association for Information Science & Technology is the
property of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple
sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.