Identifying Search Patterns in an
Image-based Digital Library
Hyejung Han
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
hanh@uwm.edu
Dietmar Wolfram
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
dwolfram@uwm.edu
ABSTRACT
Three months of clickstream transaction log data for an
image-based digital library were analyzed for patterns in
user session behavior. After extensive log cleaning of the
data files, k-means cluster analysis was applied using
selected session-related statistics. The outcomes reveal
largely uniform session behaviors (97.37%) consisting of a
limited number of actions, with a higher number of queries
than other session types, but little browsing of individual
results. Given the specialized nature of the digital
collections within the studied system, most searchers appear
to engage in purposeful, directed searching. The remaining
session clusters represent higher degrees of browsing over a
longer time with fewer queries per session. The session
behaviors for this environment are markedly different than
those revealed by transaction log studies of other
information retrieval environments.
Keywords
Digital libraries, Image searching, Transaction log analysis,
User search behavior.
INTRODUCTION
The wider availability of transaction logs has made it
possible to study how users interact with digital libraries
and other forms of information retrieval (IR) system on a
larger scale than is possible through direct observation.
Transaction log analysis has been frequently adopted for
research to identify users’ behavior on information systems
including web search engines and digital libraries. For
example, Park, Lee and Bae (2005) analyzed a week-long
transaction log data from NAVER, a Korean Web search
engine and found that users engage in simple behaviors:
they enter short queries with a few query terms, seldom use
advanced features, and view few results’ pages. Agosti,
Crivellari and Di Nunzio (2012) reviewed about 80 studies
with transaction log analysis over the past 10 years,
emphasizing the distinction between research on digital
libraries and that of general web sites. According to the
authors, digital libraries differ from the Web because they
are organized and managed by experts, they have specific
user groups, and they have much more structured
collections. Recent transaction log studies with digital
libraries have highlighted unique characteristics of user
behaviors when using specialized collections, such as a
folktale database (Trieschnigg, Nguyen & Meder, 2013), a
scholarly science digital library (Park & Lee, 2013) and a
nanoscience and technology digital library (Shiri, 2011).
Similar to Web search studies, much of the research that
has examined image retrieval, whether as user studies or
transaction logs (e.g., Choi & Rasmussen, 2003; Jansen,
2008; Pu, 2008), has focused on query-related actions and
not the full range of user search and browsing-related
activities. This is also largely true of studies that have
examined user interactions with digital library transaction
logs (e.g., Jones, Cunningham, McNab, & Boddie, 2000);
however, Sfakakis and Kapidakis (2002) did examine
clickstream data, but only reported descriptive results of
general search and browsing actions.
The present research examines the following research
questions:
1) Are distinct types of session behavior observed for an
image-based digital library based on transaction log
data?
2) If so, what search and browsing features characterize
session types?
METHOD
The present study relies on clickstream data from the digital
collections of the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
libraries. The collections, mounted using the
CONTENTdm® content management software, represent
dozens of digitized image collections totaling more than
50,000 images that include formal metadata. The collections
may be searched by keywords or browsed by identifying
collections and then using available entry points and
provided subject terms. Three months of clickstream data
(i.e. Web server logs of all system and user-initiated actions)
{This is the space reserved for copyright notices.]
ASIST 2014,November 1-4, 2014, Seattle, WA, USA.
[Author Retains Copyright. Insert personal or institutional copyright
notice here.]
were collected from September to November 2013. The log
entry fields containing vital content for each user action
included: the requesting Internet Protocol (IP) address, date
and time of the action, and the referring URL. Extensive
cleaning of the data was needed to remove system-generated
actions and duplicate user actions at the same time. User
actions were embedded in the referring URL and included,
query submission, requests for pages of results and specific
page requests.
By analyzing individual URLs requested on the transaction
log data and comparing them with the interface and the
navigational scheme of the digital library, we identified the
11 most frequently used types of actions. A similar scheme
was identified by Chen and Cooper (2001). What began as
millions of clickstream data records was initially condensed
to 1.3 million user actions. More than 50% of the remaining
records were associated with two IP addresses. Because of
the high likelihood that these addresses represent a shared
entry point to the collections, with overlapping actions from
concurrent sessions, records for these IP addresses were
excluded. Search session boundaries were estimated using a
temporal cutoff point based on the distribution of time
intervals between adjacent actions for the same IP address
submitted on the same day. The cutoff time for the dataset
was 1585 seconds, which is longer than earlier studies of
public search engine query logs (He, D., & Göker, 2000;
Spink, Wolfram, Jansen, & Saracevic, 2001). Most
identified sessions (73.9%) consisted of one or two actions.
To provide more meaningful analysis of session-level
behavior, only sessions consisting of three or more user
actions were further analyzed. Sessions consisting of more
than 1000 actions were also eliminated. A closer analysis of
these very lengthy sessions revealed they were botgenerated
and extended over many hours or across multiple
days.
Once cleaned, 14 session characteristics for the dataset
were extracted directly from the data or were derived based
on combinations of observed data. Due to the potential for
high correlations between some of the session
characteristics, as observed by Chen and Cooper (2001), a
factor analysis was run in SPSS v. 20 using principal
component extraction and varimax rotation to identify
groups of related session characteristics. The session
characteristic with the highest loading value for each
component was selected as the representative characteristic
for that component. The session data for these
representative characteristics were then used to conduct a kmeans
cluster analysis to identify groups of session
behavior. K-means clustering has been used in transaction
log analysis studies for web search behavior (Kathuria,
Jansen, Hafernik & Spink, 2010; Stenmark, 2008; Belk,
Papatheocharous, Germanakos, & Samaras, 2012) and
digital library search behavior (Xu & Recker, 2012; Frias-
Martinez, Chen, Macredie & Liu, 2007). According to
Kathuria et al., the use of k-means as a classification
technique yielded positive results and fared better than a
binary tree classification algorithm. Moreover, Frias-
Martinez et al. believed that the k-means clustering is
popular because it is easy to understand user behavior of
digital libraries and it’s easy to implement.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A summary of the characteristics of the cleaned dataset
appears in Table 1. The 11 identified actions and their
frequencies are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2. Typology of session actions
A total of 15186 sessions containing at least three actions
were identified. The factor analysis identified six
components that accounted for a total of 74% of the
variance. The representative session characteristics with the
highest loading values for each component appear in Table
3. Only two of the six characteristics represent observed
values (Session Actions, Print/View). The remaining
characteristics were derived. Note that the Print Views
characteristic represents a more detailed examination of an
individual image over a Single Item View and/or request
for a print out of the image. Although it represents a
Dataset Feature Value
Total Sessions 15186
Total User Actions 325059
User Actions per Session
Mean = 21.4
s.d. = 45.4
Median = 8
Table 1. Summary table of dataset Features
Type of Action Frequency %
Single item (image/document)
views 120007 36.9%
Page of results request 91801 28.2%
Simple search 69335 21.3%
Landing page 25652 7.9%
Advanced search 12613 3.9%
Printing/Viewing an image 2098 0.6%
Information page request 1391 0.4%
Metadata search 1274 0.4%
Video player (multimedia item) 358 0.1%
Assisted search 356 0.1%
Timeline (date information was
available for some collections) 174 0.1%
Total Actions 325059 100.0%
Table 2. Typology of session actions
relatively infrequent action, it was the singular high loading
session characteristic within the sixth component.
Session
Characteristic
How Calculated
Comp.
Loading
Session Actions
The total number of
actions for a session
.970
Proportion of
Browsing Actions
The total actions related
to browsing divided by
the Session Actions
.823
Proportion
Landing Page
Visits
Total Landing Page
Visits divided by the
Session Actions
.831
Average Time
Between Queries
Time between the first
and last query action
divided by the Queries
per Session
.734
Average Single
Item Views Per
Query
Total Image Page Visits
per session divided by
Queries per Session
.796
Print/View
The number of Print
/Views per session
.837
Table 3. Summary table of dataset features
The k-means cluster analysis was run with different
numbers of clusters. In each case, the vast majority of
sessions fell into one cluster. With four or more clusters
there was very small membership for some clusters (1-4
sessions). Three clusters revealed distinct session
characteristics (Table 4). More than 97% of the sessions fell
into a cluster that can be characterized by comparatively
few actions with the shortest time between queries and little
browsing of individual results. The second cluster,
representing 2.52% of sessions, consisted of mid-range
values for the session characteristics, with searchers less
likely to use landing pages, perhaps indicating focused
searches within given collections. The last cluster,
consisting of the smallest number of sessions (0.11%)
contained the highest levels of browsing actions (except the
proportion of landing page visits) and time taken between
queries. Interestingly, the longest sessions consisting of the
most actions fall primarily within the first two clusters,
indicating that the number of session actions, although
playing a part in characterizing user search behavior, is not
singularly influential. Given the greater support for
browsing in a digital library environment in comparison to
other types of IR environments such as public search
engines and bibliographic databases, the high level of
browsing or viewing-related actions (viewing individual
items, requesting a page of results, requests for information
pages) across all three clusters is not surprising. They
represent approximately 74% of recorded actions over the
complete dataset, indicating that users engage in more
exploratory searching (Marchionini, 2006) in this
environment. The average number of individual images
viewed per query is relatively small, so users may be
initially evaluating results based on the thumbnails of the
image along with provided metadata and then are selective
about the individual images they view. The fact that the
average time between queries is relatively long for all
clusters supports the idea that users are spending time
evaluating content--although for the vast majority of
sessions users are not interested in a large number of
images. The results for the studied environment, with one
overwhelmingly dominant cluster, were very different than
those observed by Chen and Cooper (2001) for an online
public access catalog system and Wolfram, Wang and
Zhang (2009) for the three public Web systems they
studied, perhaps highlighting the more uniform nature of
search behavior in the studied environment. One
implication arising from the present findings is that
interfaces for image-based digital libraries need to facilitate
rapid browsing of groups of images. Detailed browsing of
individual images was less important for searchers. Further
research with other image-based digital library
environments is needed to confirm whether this is also
observed with other similar image-based collections.
CONCLUSIONS
The analysis of clickstream transaction log data for the
studied image-based digital library reveals that although
search lengths may be very different, the general search
behavior is quite uniform, with the vast majority of search
sessions representing focused searches with predominantly
browsing-related actions, but little viewing of individual
items. More detailed browsing, represented by longer
intervals between actions and viewing of more source
images, constituted less than 3% of the recorded sessions.
System support of focused browsing that allows users to
easily scan and identify relevant content is needed in these
types of specialized digital library environments.
Cluster
1 2 3
Cluster Membership
(Number of Sessions,
Percentage of Total)
14787
97.37%
382
2.52%
17
0.11%
Cluster Center
Session Actions 21.01 35.59 47.29
Proportion of Browsing
Actions .69 .69 .83
Proportion Landing
Page Visits .14 .09 .02
Average Time
Between Queries 50.70 880.84
3038.6
4
Average Single Item
Views Per Query 1.37 3.52 7.29
Print Views .13 .32 .41
Table 4. K-means cluster outcomes
The exploratory cluster analysis represents one method by
which to study patterns of search behavior. Future research
will apply additional approaches such as sequence mining and
network analysis of session actions to further characterize user
search behavior in an image-based digital library.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We’d like to thank the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
libraries for providing access to the transaction log data.
REFERENCES
Agosti, M., Crivellari, F., & Di Nunzio, G. M. (2012). Web
log analysis: a review of a decade of studies about
information acquisition, inspection and interpretation of
user interaction. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery,
24(3), 663-696.
Belk, M., Papatheocharous, E., Germanakos, P., &
Samaras, G. (2012). Investigating the Relation between
Users’ Cognitive Style and Web Navigation Behavior
with K-means Clustering. In Advances in Conceptual
Modeling (pp. 337-346). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Chen, H. M., & Cooper, M. D. (2001). Using clustering
techniques to detect usage patterns in a Web-based
information system. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 52(11), 888-904.
Frias-Martinez, E., Chen, S. Y., Macredie, R. D., & Liu, X.
(2007). The role of human factors in stereotyping
behavior and perception of digital library users: A robust
clustering approach. User Modeling and User-Adapted
Interaction, 17(3), 305-337.
He, D., & Göker, A. (2000). Detecting session boundaries
from web user logs. In Proceedings of the BCS-IRSG
22nd annual colloquium on information retrieval
research (pp. 57-66).
Jansen, B. J. (2008). Searching for digital images on the
Web. Journal of Documentation, 64(1), 81-101.
Jones, S., Cunningham, S. J., McNab, R., & Boddie, S.
(2000). A transaction log analysis of a digital library.
International Journal on Digital Libraries, 3(2), 152-169.
Kathuria, A., Jansen, B. J., Hafernik, C., & Spink, A.
(2010). Classifying the user intent of web queries using
k-means clustering. Internet Research, 20(5), 563-581.
Marchionini, G. (2006). Exploratory search: from finding to
understanding. Communications of the ACM, 49(4), 41-46.
Park, M., & Lee, T. S. (2013). Understanding science and
technology information users through transaction log
analysis. Library Hi Tech, 31(1), 123-140.
Park, S., Lee, J. H., & Bae, H.J. (2005). End user searching:
A Web log analysis of NAVER, a Korean Web search
engine. Library & Information Science Research, 27(2),
203-221.
Shiri, A. (2011). Query management techniques and their
impact in digital libraries. International Journal of
Information, 3(1), 9-17.
Pu, H. T. (2008). An analysis of failed queries for Web
image retrieval. Journal of Information Science, 34(3),
275-289.
Sfakakis, M., & Kapidakis, S. (2002). User behavior
tendencies on data collections in a digital library. In
Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries
(pp. 550-559). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Spink, A., Wolfram, D., Jansen, M. B., & Saracevic, T.
(2001). Searching the web: The public and their queries.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 52(3), 226-234.
Stenmark, D. (2008). Identifying clusters of user behavior
in intranet search engine log files. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 59(14), 2232-2243.
Trieschnigg, D., Nguyen, D., & Meder, T. (2013). In search
of Cinderella: A transaction log analysis of folktale
searchers. In the Proceedings of the First Workshop on
the Exploration, Navigation and Retrieval of Information
in Cultural Heritage, 36th Annual ACM SIGIR
Conference, SIGIR 2013, Dublin, Ireland. August 1st,
2013.
Wolfram, D., Wang, P., & Zhang, J. (2009). Identifying
Web search session patterns using cluster analysis: A
comparison of three search environments. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 60(5), 896-910.
Xu, B., & Recker, M. (2012). Teaching analytics: A
clustering and triangulation study of digital library user
data. Educational Technology & Society, 15(3), 103-115.
Copyright of Proceedings of the Association for Information Science & Technology is the
property of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple
sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.