Automatically infer subject terms and documents
associations through text mining
Kun Lu
School of Library and Information Studies
University of Oklahoma
401 West Brooks, Norman, OK, 73019
kunlu@ou.edu
Jin Mao
Wuhan University
Center for the Studies of Information Resource
Wuhan, China
danveno@163.com
ABSTRACT
Subject indexing is an intellectual intensive process that
bears many inherent uncertainties. Existing subject index
systems generally produce binary outcomes on whether
assigning an indexing term or not, which does not
sufficiently reflect to which extent the indexing terms are
associated with documents. On the other hand, probabilistic
models have seen great success in capturing the
uncertainties in the automatic indexing process. One hurdle
to achieving weighted indexing in manual subject indexing
process is the practical burden that could be added to the
already intensive indexing process. In this study, we
propose a method to automatically infer the associations
between subject terms and documents through text mining.
By uncovering the connections between MeSH terms and
document text, we are able to derive the weights of MeSH
terms in documents. Our initial results suggest that the new
method is feasible and promising. The study has practical
implications for improving subject indexing practice.
Keywords
Subject indexing; weighted indexing; text mining
INTRODUCTION
Natural language has a loose structure that allows great
variability. Many words can be used to refer to the same
concept and the same word can refer to different concepts
depending on the contexts. This may lead to problematic
retrieval when user queries are matched to terms from
documents. Controlled vocabularies are the major tools to
help overcome the variability in natural language. By
normalizing both users’ and authors’ vocabularies via
controlled vocabulary thesaurus, it is expected to achieve a
concept level matching and solve the vocabulary problem
(Furnas et al., 1987). MeSH is the primary thesaurus for
describing the content of biomedical literature. Tremendous
efforts are invested to assign these carefully designed
descriptors to the content in hope for better organization
and retrieval. The assignment of MeSH terms is a binary
decision by professionals based on their interpretation of
the content and use of the thesaurus. While MeSH terms
have shown great effectiveness in many IR applications
(Shin & Han, 2004; Meij, et al., 2010; Jalali & Borujerdi,
2011), the current binary model of description using MeSH
terms is insufficient in reflecting the inherent uncertainties
in the subject indexing process (Mai, 2001). It has been
noted that a piece of work can be related to multiple facets
and each facet could have different importance depending
on whether it is the major or minor point. However, the
importance of the MeSH terms is not represented in this
model. The only effort to this end is to assign an asterisk to
the MeSH terms that reflect the major points of the article1.
On the other hand, probabilistic models have seen great
success in automatic indexing and free-text searching.
Therefore, we hypothesize that a weighted indexing model
would be more advantageous for manual subject headings
and better capture the inherent uncertainties in subject
indexing. However, it would be impractical to add further
burden to indexers and ask them to make the judgment. The
purpose of this study is to propose an automatic approach to
infer the associations between MeSH terms and documents
based on text mining algorithms. It should be noted that
although we are using MeSH terms in this study, the same
idea could also be applied to other manual indexing
systems.
PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we introduce a novel approach to estimate
weights for the manually assigned subject headings. Our
method is based on the mutual information theorem. In
information theory, mutual information measures the
mutual dependence of the two random variables. In our
research, this mutual dependence can be interpreted as
1
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/disted/pubmedtutorial/015_030.html
ASIST 2013, November 1-6, 2013, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
content relatedness. Thus, the mutual information of the
document as well as the subject heading indicates the extent
to which the document is about the subject heading. It
should be noted that this method only represents a first
attempt to implement the idea.
As in the language modeling approach, we view a
document as a probability distribution of terms, denoted as
. To quantify the associations between documents and
information between a document
subject headings, we calculate the weighted mutual
and the assigned
subject heading . The formula is represented as:
(1)
where is the weight of the pair <t,h>, t represents a
term in the document and h is a subject heading associated
with the document. We use TF-IDF weighting to calculate
the weight:
(2)
where N is the total number of documents in the collection,
is the document frequency of term t, is the
document frequency of subject heading term h.
With respect to , maximum
frequency of the object
likelihood estimation can be applied. If the document
in the corpus is
, the
probability can be calculated as:
(3)
in document
Finally, we obtain the ultimate weight for subject heading
by normalizing all the obtained weighted
mutual information for each document.
(4)
.
RESULTS
We applied our method to the Ohsumed collection as a pilot
test. Ohsumed is a clinically-oriented Medline subset with
348,566 documents over a five-year period (1987-1991)2.
Each document consists of seven fields: title, MeSH,
author, publication type, abstract, source and record
identifier. Out of 348,566 documents, 23 have empty MeSH
field. In total, we have 348,543 documents with manually
2 http://ir.ohsu.edu/ohsumed/ohsumed.html
assigned MeSH terms. Our purpose is to use the method
proposed above to automatically derive weights for the
MeSH terms.
Avg. #
MeSH per
doc
Std. # MeSH
per doc
Min # MeSH
per doc
Max #
MeSH per
doc
10.6 4.34 1 33
Table 1. Basic descriptive statistics of MeSH terms in
Ohsumed collection
Some descriptive statistics is provided in Table 1. Each
document in our collection was assigned 10.6 MeSH terms
on average with a standard deviation of 4.34. The range is
from 1 to 33 MeSH terms per document. We applied
automatic indexing to each field in the documents and then
computed the mutual information between MeSH terms and
documents as proposed in the previous section. In this way,
we automatically derived weightings for the already
assigned MeSH terms in the collection. To provide an
example of our results, document ID 22, titled “Emergency
department thoracotomy”, was assigned five MeSH terms:
“Human”, “Thoracic injuries/SU”, “Transportation of
Patients/MT”, “Wounds, Penetrating/MO” and “Emergency
Service, Hospital”. With the method proposed in the study,
we are able to assign weights to them automatically. Figure
1 provides the weights of the headings.
Figure 1. An example of weighted MeSH for document
“Emergency department thoracotomy”
We can tell from Figure 1 that the article is mostly
associated with the heading “Emergency Service, Hospital”
(42.7%), following by “Wounds, Penetrating/MO” (24.6%),
then “Transportation of Patients/MT” (17.4%) and etc.
With the weighted MeSH terms, we have more options to
represent the uncertainties in the subject indexing process.
This could benefit the applications such as information
retrieval and text mining. For example, we may develop
retrieval algorithms that take into account the weighted
MeSH terms instead of treating them equally as in previous
systems. We can also present the MeSH weightings to endusers
to inform them the strength of the associations.
To further verify our results, we compared the weights of
the major headings assigned by NLM indexers (e.g. “Allied
Health Personnel/*”) to those of the non-major headings.
There are in total 1,070,533 major headings and 2,623,353
non-major headings in our collection. The average weight
of major headings is 0.099 comparing to 0.092 of nonmajor
headings. The difference is statistically significant
with a two tailed t-test (p<0.05, df.=3,693,884). However,
given that the major headings only have 7.6% higher
weights than the non-major ones, we conclude that our
method does not always weight the manually assigned
major headings higher. One possible reason for this could
be that MeSH also includes non-topical descriptors such as
characteristics of the group being studied (e.g. the age
group, human or other animal) and publication types (e.g.
review, editorial). These descriptors may add noise to the
text mining algorithm. Further exploration into this is
needed in future study.
CONCLUSION
Subject indexing process employs subject analysis and
controlled vocabulary to describe a document. Most
existing subject index systems only produce binary
outcomes on whether to assign indexing terms or not. This
binary model does not adequately reflect the inherent
uncertainties in subject indexing process. In this study, we
proposed a method that automatically derives weightings
for manually assigned subject terms through mining the
implicit connections between subject headings and
document text. When indexers assign MeSH terms to a
document, they unnoticeably create connections between
the MeSH terms and the document text. With a sufficient
sample size, these connections can be mined for patterns
that help to evaluate the associations between MeSH terms
and documents. The essential idea of our method is to
uncover the connections and automatically assign weights
for subject headings. This method does not add further
burden to indexers. Additionally, with the new sample
coming in, the method can also incorporate our dynamic
understanding on the subject and adjust the weights
accordingly. It should be noted that we are not aiming to
replace the manual indexing process neither. The study in
fact uses the results from manual indexing and derives
weights for the subject terms. The initial results appear to
be promising. And we are positive that there are better ways
to estimate the weights. This study only serves as a pilot
test. But what’s more important is to pave the way for
automatic subject term weighting system that helps to
distinguish the extent to which the terms are associated with
documents.
REFERENCES
Furnas, G.W., Landauer, T.K., Gomez, L.M., & Dumais,
S.T. (1987). The vocabulary problem in human-system
communication. Communication of the ACM, 30(11),
964-971.
Jalali, V., & Borujerdi, M. (2011). Information retrieval
with concept-based pseudo-relevance feedback in
MEDLINE. Knowledge and Information Systems, 29(1),
237-248.
Mai, J. (2001). Semiotics and indexing: an analysis of the
subject indexing process. Journal of Documentation,
57(5), 591-622.
Meij, E., Trieschnigg, D., de Rijke, M., & Kraaij, W.
(2010). Conceptual language models for domain-specific
retrieval. Information Processing and Management,
46(4), 448-469.
Shin, K., & Han, S.Y. (2004). Improving information
retrieval in MEDLINE by modulating MeSH term
weights. LNCS, 3136, 388-394.
.
Copyright of Proceedings of the Association for Information Science & Technology is the
property of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple
sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.