Linguistic characteristics of eating disorder questions on
Yahoo! Answers – content, style, and emotion
Jung Sun Oh
jsoh@pitt.edu
Daqing He
daqing@sis.pitt.edu
Wei Jeng
wej9@pitt.edu
Eleanor Mattern
emm100@pitt.edu
Leanne Bowler
lbowler@sis.pitt.edu
University of Pittsburgh
135 North Bellefield Avenue
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
ABSTRACT
Social Q&A provides the possibility of looking into how
people verbally express their information needs in natural
language. In this study, we analyzed linguistic properties of
different types of questions on the topic of eating disorders
in Yahoo! Answers. Using term frequency analysis, Partof-
Speech (POS) analysis, and sentiment analysis, we
examined linguistic content, linguistic style, and emotional
expressions in two broad categories of eating disorder
questions from Yahoo! Answers – socio-emotional
questions and informational questions.
Overall, the results of this study show that the language
used in these two categories of questions are substantially
different, suggesting the different nature of the needs that
underlie these questions. Socio-emotional questions take
similar characteristics to personal narratives, focusing on
past experiences and emotions. The heavy use of negative
emotion words in this question type, along with other
distinct linguistic characteristics, suggests that a key
motivation of users asking this type of question is to work
through their emotions related to the given health issue
(eating disorders). On the other hand, informational
questions show traits of relatively complex, precise, and
objective writing, and reflect much varied interests with
regard to the topic of eating disorders.
All in all, this study demonstrates that the combination of
simple text analytic techniques reveals much about the
linguistic characteristics associated with different kinds of
questions, and thereby shed lights on the nature of the needs
underneath the questions.
Keywords
Social Q&A, Health Information Behavior, Eating
disorders, Language Use Analysis
INTRODUCTION
For the past several years, social Question and Answer
(Q&A) has attracted substantial attention from researchers
in a variety of fields (Gazan, 2011). The tremendous
amount of publicly available question/answer data created
by real users holds potential for advancing many areas of
research, studies of user information behavior being one of
them.
Our research team has been investigating health
information seeking behavior of teens and young adults in
the context of social Q&A with a particular health topic,
eating disorders. In our previous study (Bowler et al.,
2012), we took the first step towards understanding teens’
use of social Q&A for health information. Through a
content analysis of eating disorder questions collected from
Yahoo! Answers, we identified a range of needs and
motivations appearing in the questions, and developed a
taxonomy of question types consisting of five overarching
themes - Seeking Information, Seeking Emotional Support,
Seeking Communication, Seeking Self-Expression, and
Seeking Help to Complete a Task.
Having identified the broad categories of questions, we now
proceed to further understand the characteristics of
questions in different categories and the needs that underlie
them. One approach we are exploring is to apply an array of
linguistic analysis methods to examine the words people
use in their questions, in order to uncover cognitive, social,
and affective aspects of the underlying needs. Previous
studies of language use (reviewed in the next section) have
shown that the way people use words in natural language is
determined, to a large extent, by social, situational, and
psychological factors and, therefore, the occurrences and
distributions of certain words in texts can be used to probe
the writer’ situation and state of mind at the time of writing.
In this study, we will adopt the same approach and
scrutinize the use of words in our eating disorder questions,
focusing on three word classes – content words (words
representing themes), function words (words concerning
linguistic styles, e.g. preposition, conjunction), and emotion
words. Through the analysis of their distributions across
question categories, we aim to address the following
questions: How do questions in different categories differ in
ASIST 2013, November 1-6, 2013, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Copyright Jung Sun Oh, Daqing He, Wei Jeng, Eleanor Mattern, Leanne
Bower.
their use of content, style, and emotion words? What can
we learn about the underlying needs and motivations of
users from the observed patterns of word use? Can we infer
cognitive, social and affective aspects of the askers’ needs
from their question language?
In this paper, we will discuss the background and
justification of our approach, and present a case study using
a small dataset of eating disorder questions.
LITERATURE REVIEW
Health Information Seeking in Social Media
According to a recent Pew Internet report, seeking health
information is among the Internet activities that are
“becoming more uniformly popular across all age
groups”(Zickuhr, 2010). The survey results show that
seeking health information has become the third most
popular activity, following email and search engine use.
With the prevalence of online health information seeking,
researchers in the medical field started to notice the
growing role of social media in health communication
(Chou, Hunt, Beckjord, Moser, & Hesse, 2009), and have
investigated its impact on patients (Jaloba, 2009; Ressler et
al., 2012). At the same time, researchers have attended to
the potential value of social media as a source for studying
people’s behavior and attitudes regarding health-related
topics (Chou et al., 2011; Robillard et al., 2013). For
instance, Rollibard et al. (2013) conducted a content
analysis of questions collected from Yahoo! Answers, in
order to find out the kinds of information being sought by
public users with regard to a particular health topic, gene
therapy, and to assess the public opinions and attitudes
expressed towards the topic. They found a wide range of
issues of interest to public users related to the topic,
including ethical concerns. As a concluding remark, they
claimed that user-generated contents in a social media can
be a rich source for research into health-information
seeking behavior.
This study joins the body of research on health information
seeking in social media. The health topic of our interest,
eating disorders, is closely tied to a particular user group:
teens and adolescents. The tendency of relying heavily on
Internet for obtaining health information appears to be more
salient in this user group (Rideout, 2001) and especially for
sensitive topics like eating disorders. The teens' and
adolescents' hesitance to discuss sensitive health issues with
those close to them or health professionals has been noted
repeatedly by researchers (Ackard & Neumark-Sztainer,
2001; Eysenbach, 2008; Katzman et al., 2010). We may
speculate that a significant portion of information seeking
regarding eating disorders is likely to take place on Internet
or through social media, due to a desire for anonymity. We
believe that non-obtrusive observation afforded by social
Q&A data is particularly valuable for this health topic,
eating disorder, and the user group, teens and young adults.
Language Use Analysis
While there exists a wide array of linguistic analysis with
varying levels of sophistication, some researchers in the
field of social linguistics have been advocating for a simple
approach based on counting and categorizing words. They
argue that the words people use in their daily speaking or
writing reveal a great deal of information about their
situation and the state of mind, often in an unexpected way
(Boals, 2005; Chung & Pennebaker, 2007). In a series of
studies on natural language use, using various kinds of texts
(speech transcripts, emotional narratives, journals, and so
on), they have demonstrated that aggregate counts of word
categories in a text, regardless of the context in which
individual words occur, closely correlate with various
psychological, cognitive, and even biological measures
(Pennebaker et al., 2003). In their analysis, they distinguish
two broad categories of words – content words and function
words (Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010).
Content words generally include nouns, regular verbs,
adjectives and adverbs. Taken together, content words
represent the theme or topic of the text. It is then natural
that most content analysis approaches focused on this type
of content-heavy words. Similarly, automatic indexing and
information retrieval techniques have revolved around the
idea that certain words in a text better represent its content
or topic. In general, frequently appearing terms, excluding
stopwords, are assumed to be more important.
While content words represent what people are talking or
writing about (linguistic content), function words, also
called style words, are related to how they are saying it
(linguistic style). Function words include pronouns,
prepositions, articles, conjunctions, and auxiliary verbs.
Note that these words usually fall under the category of
‘stopwords,’ words that are considered as of little to no
value in indexing or content analysis. However, a wide
range of word use studies consistently found the important
role of function words, not only in understanding the
psychological state of the speakers (writers), but also
uncovering social factors or situations affecting their
thoughts and feelings. Among others, pronoun uses have
been studied heavily, and linked to depression or mental
distress (first person singular pronoun), isolation or group
identity (first person singular vs. plural pronouns), social
support, engagement, or awareness (second and third
person pronouns) (Boals, 2005; Chung & Pennebaker,
2007; Pennebaker et al., 2003). Other function words are
also found to be useful in detecting different characteristics
in writing. For instance, the use of conjunctions (e.g.
“and,” “but,” “also”) can be an indication of coherence in
narratives, as they are used to combine or juxtapose
multiple thoughts (Graesser et al., 2004, as cited in
Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). The use of prepositions, on
the other hand, suggests that information given in the text is
more complex and concrete, as they are often used to
qualify or further specify what is being described (Tausczik
& Pennebaker, 2010).
In summary, the studies of word use demonstrate that
relatively simple text analysis methods can reveal much
about the message without getting deeply into examining
intricate semantic and/or syntactic structure of language.
The analysis strategy that we adopt in this study was
informed by the word use analysis described above.
Similar technical approaches were adopted in previous
studies for different purposes. Harper et al. (2009), in their
investigation of three social Q&A sites (Yahoo! Answers,
Answerbag, and Ask Metafilter), identified two broad
categories of questions – informational questions and
conversational questions – and investigated the problem of
detecting question type for a given question using machine
learning algorithms. Some linguistic categories, such as
interrogative words and personal pronouns, were included
among a number of textual features examined for the
classification purpose. They found that pronouns are highly
predicative of different types of questions. More
specifically, they reported that the personal pronoun “I”
appeared highly in informational questions while “you” is
used more often to address the readers. Liu et al. (2011)
also used linguistic features as well as statistical features as
the learning features of their machine learning algorithms.
The task for their classifier is to distinguish questions asked
by healthcare professionals from those asked by healthcare
consumers. They identified four linguistic categories –
interrogative words, personal pronouns, indefinite
pronouns, and auxiliary verbs – as potentially useful
features for the classification purpose. Classification
performance was measured using different combinations of
the linguistic features and statistical features (e.g. word
length, sentence length).
Unlike Harper et al. (2009) and Liu et al. (2011), who
analyzed the word use and some linguistic categories for
the purpose of automatic classification of questions, we are
interested in exploring whether and how the language in
questions reflect different nature of needs behind the
questions or different situations where the needs arose.
Sentiment Analysis
Emotion plays an important role in people’s information
behavior as a motivating factor (Nahl, 2007). In the context
of health information seeking, where user behavior is often
interpreted as emotion-focused coping strategies in face of a
health-threatening situation (Lambert & Loiselle, 2007), the
emotional dimension was deemed to be more important. In
light of that, we are interested in examining the degree to
which teens express emotions in the questions and how they
differ by question categories. Sentiment analysis was
chosen as a method for the inspection. It should be noted
here that, with sentiment analysis, we focus only on the
valence dimension of emotions, which varies from positive
to negative (Russell, 1980), rather than discrete emotions.
Sentiment analysis, also known as opinion mining or
subjectivity analysis, encompasses various techniques to
detect sentiments expressed in natural language text, mostly
focusing on polarity (positive or negative) of sentiments
(Liu, 2010; Pang & Lee, 2008). Broadly speaking, there are
two main approaches in sentiment analysis: lexicon-based
approach and machine-learning approach (Taboada et al.,
2011). The lexicon-based approach relies on complied lists
of words, in which sentiment orientation of each word is
defined. The sentiment of a text is basically determined
based on the occurrences of these words. The machinelearning
approach, on the other hand, typically involves a
set of texts with known polarity and a learning algorithm to
identify features associated with a particular sentiment in
the training set. The identified features are then used to
detect the sentiment in other texts.
Although sentiment analysis has been used mainly for
commercial goals to collect consumer feedback on products
or brands, there have been studies applying sentiment
analysis to Social Q&A data. For instance, Li et al. (2008)
proposed to automatically detect subjectivity orientation
(subjective vs. objective) of a question to find answers that
better match the intent of the question. Using a supervised
learning method, they identified features (character, word,
and POS n-grams) that are useful for detecting subjectivity
orientation of questions and answers. Denecke and Nejdl
(2009) applied sentiment analysis to social media contents
in the medical domain. They noted a need for more
sophisticated search mechanisms for user-generated
medical contents that take into account the expertise of the
author and the type of information given. With that goal in
mind, they compared medical Q&A portals, medical
weblogs, medical reviews, and Wikis. Sentiment analysis
was performed on blog posts in order to consider
informative posts apart from affective posts. These studies
use sentiment analysis as part of algorithms to classify
questions in social Q&A based on their expressed
sentiment. Our approach differs from these in that our
purpose in analyzing sentiments is to assess and compare
the degree to which emotions are expressed in questions in
different categories, and to explore the role of emotions in
questions asked in social Q&A. With the availability of user
generate contents on a variety of topics and in diverse
contexts, Thelwall et al. (2010) noted the potential value of
sentiment analysis for studying user behaviors, especially
for understanding the affective dimension of information
seeking. This study attempts to exploit the potential.
METHODS
Data set and question categories
In this study, we use a dataset constructed in our previous
study of eating disorder questions on Yahoo! Answers
(Bowler et al., 2012), in which we collected a total of 2,230
questions on the topic of eating disorders from Yahoo!
Answers, and subsequently built two datasets based on
different criteria. A classification scheme was derived
inductively through content analysis of these two datasets,
with five overarching themes - Seeking Information,
Seeking Emotional Support, Seeking Communication,
Seeking Self-Expression, and Seeking Help to Complete a
Task (For a detailed description of the datasets and a
discussion of question categories and subcategories in our
scheme, see Bowler et al., 2012).
In this study, we used the dataset containing the 180 longest
questions from the initial set of 2,230 questions (the number
of words per question in this subset ranges from 439 to
1,466) and used the coding results from the previous study
to examine characteristics of questions in different
categories. Among the 180 questions, we removed those
questions where the topic of eating disorders was not a
main interest or a central theme but rather mentioned in a
cursory manner. The final dataset for this study includes 72
questions that two coders agreed were closely tied to the
topic of eating disorders.
Due to the small size of the dataset, we divided the
questions into two broad categories – informational and
socio-emotional – by aggregating the original coding.
Socio-emotional category includes subcategories of Seeking
Emotional Support, Seeking Communication, and Seeking
Self-Expression; informational category includes Seeking
Information and Seeking Help to Complete a Task. Out of
the total of 72 questions (ones that are agreed as relevant by
two coders), 40 questions were categorized as socioemotional
questions and 16 were categorized as
informational questions. The remaining 16 were
categorized as mixed, meaning that coding results were split
between socio-emotional and informational. This high
proportion of socio-emotional questions may be an artifact
of choosing the longest questions in the initial dataset.
Language analysis
To explore differences in word use between questions in
different categories, we examined three different aspects of
word use: linguistic contents (content words), linguistic
style (function words), and subjectivity/sentiment
expression. As for the methods, term frequency analysis,
Part-of-Speech (POS) analysis, and sentiment analysis were
used to capture those aspects. All the analysis was done in
R, a statistical computing environment (http://www.RProject.
org).
In order to examine the words that represent central themes
in question sets, we conducted an analysis of term
frequency focusing on content words. Using the tm package
in R, we created the question corpus with relevant metadata
including the assigned category for each question. After a
series of preprocessing, including removal of stopwords, we
built a document-term matrix (DTM) holding the term
frequency of each term t for each document d. In order to
reduce the effect of document length, each term frequency
measure in a document was normalized using the log
average of all the term frequencies in the document.
In order to examine the use of function words in questions,
it is necessary to first identify the linguistic category of
each and every word in the question sentences. For that
purpose, we conducted a Part-of-Speech (POS) analysis
using the KoRpus package in R, which is a R wrapper for
the TreeTagger program (Schmid, 1994). We then
compared the distribution of POS tags across question
types, and examined the differential use of the words in
certain linguistic categories.
The emotional aspects expressed in questions were
explored with sentiment analysis. We used a lexicon-based
approach, which is basically matching terms in the corpus
of interest against a list of subjective terms with pre-coded
polarity. The lexicon-based sentiment analysis has been
used widely in previous studies. We identified three
commonly used lexicons in sentiment analysis and merged
them for our analysis. The three lexicons we used were
Harvard General Inquirer (Stone et al., 1966), Opinion
Lexicon (Hu & Liu, 2004), Subjectivity Lexicon (Wilson et
al., 2005). The resulting list includes 3,172 positive terms
and 5,281 negative terms in total. Using the list of positive
terms and negative terms and a simple algorithm, we assign
subjectivity scores and sentiment scores to questions, in
order to compare the extent to which emotional or
subjective expressions appear in different types of
questions.
RESULTS
Basic statistics per question set
Before going into the main analysis, we first inspected
some descriptive statistics about the questions in each set,
shown in Table 1. Socio-emotional questions tend to be
longer and contain more proportion of stopwords (most of
which can be regarded as function words as discussed in the
Literature Review section). In Table 1, a clear trend of
increased number and length of sentences can be seen when
comparing informational questions to socio-emotional
questions with the mixed questions in between. In contrast,
average length of words is longest in informational
questions and shortest in socio-emotional questions. It is
interesting to see that the mixed questions (questions in
which category decisions of the coders were split) stand in
the middle on every measure, suggesting that these
questions take characteristics of both questions, not only
semantically but also in linguistic features. In order to make
a clearer comparison between the two main categories, we
excluded the mixed questions from the subsequent analyses.
Informational
Mixed Socioemotional
Avg. no. of words per
question
613.50 650.69 760.10
Avg. % of stopwords
per question
59.4% 64.4% 69.7%
Avg. word length 4.46 4.19 3.95
Avg. no. of sentences
per question
44.50 41.25 46.68
Avg. sentence length 14.90 17.32 21.93
Table 1. Descriptive statistics
Content words – term frequency analysis
The analysis of term frequency allows us to see what people
are talking about with related to their questions on eating
disorder. In order to focus on content words, stopwords
were removed in this part of analysis. By comparing the
frequent terms across question categories, we can find out
the words that typify a certain type of question.
Figure 1 shows two Wordclouds created from the result of
term frequency analysis, visually presenting terms based on
their prominence in the respective set. A larger font size
indicates a higher frequency of the term. Note that
frequency analysis was done after stemming, but for a
better reading of the results, stems were replaced by
complete words after computing frequencies. Among the
possible extensions of the stem word, a stem word was
mapped to either the shortest or the most prevalent form
found in the corpus.
While there is some obvious and expected overlap such as
‘eat’, ‘disorder’, or ‘teen’, the two wordclouds in Figure 1
show quite different patterns of word usage in the two
question sets. For example, words referring to family
members stand out in the socio-emotional set, whereas
more general reference terms, such as 'girl' or 'model',
appear more prominent in the informational set.
In order to further examine the differential word use by
question category, the chi-square analysis was performed to
find out those terms that are significantly more frequent in
one set than in the other. More specifically, we calculated
chi-square value for each term in our dataset using the chisquare
function in the R corpora package, which is based
on Stefan Evert’s algorithm for comparing word frequency
in text corpora (Evert, 2005). For this test, the raw
frequency counts were used instead of log-normalized
measures because the test itself takes the discrepancies in
document sizes into account and compares the frequencies
proportionally.
The result of chi-square analysis shows that there are 44
words that are significantly more frequent in socioemotional
questions, and 108 words appearing more
frequently in informational questions (at p < .05). Table 2
presents the top 40 words that are significantly more
frequent in socio-emotional questions based on the chisquare
value, and Table 3 shows the same for informational
questions.
1-10 11-20 21-30 31-40
time live smoke ate
friend gluten random school
try hate argue deal
lot mom doctor refuse
sister bit yell sexual
day sorry scare site
dad mean facebook home
life father kcal stupid
mother move actual start
feel sometime pretty boyfriend
Table 2. Top 40 words in socio-emotional questions
1-10 11-20 21-30 31-40
model girl result paper
beauty anorexia skinny feet
retouch muscle specify fashion
image jasmine characterized osteoporosis
magazine loss stamp pressure
disorder children contest diet
nervosa women mary behavior
body natural pageant woman
media build bulimia caus
thin celebrity society injury
Table 3. Top 40 words in informational questions
The results confirmed the initial observation made in Figure
1 Wordclouds. Words denoting social relations show a high
frequency in the socio-emotional question set. Words for
family relations – sister, dad, mother, mom, father, and
parent – all have high chi-square value (all significant at p <
.05). The word ‘friend’ ranked second in the order of chisquare
value, and ‘boyfriend’ was also significantly more
frequent in this set. Words referring to social settings such
as home or school were also high. Another group of words
that appear more frequently in socio-emotional questions
includes those words related to feeling or subjective
evaluation (e.g. hate, sorry, scare, stupid, upset).
On the other hand, in informational questions, among the
words with highest chi-square value are terms related to
media or information bearing objects such as magazine,
paper, article. Words referring to specific medical
conditions (e.g. osteoporosis) or describing human body
(muscle, thin, skinny) were also relatively more frequent in
informational questions. Another interesting observation is
that terms for various eating disorder conditions (e.g.
anorexia, bulimia, binge) were frequently found in
informational questions, but not in socio-emotional
questions, even though those terms were included in our
search terms.
Function words – POS analysis
In this part, we shift our attention to linguistic markers that
represent different styles of communication. As discussed
in the Literature Review above, function words include
words in certain linguistic categories such as preposition,
which can be identified by Part-of-Speech (POS) tagging. .
Tables 4 and 5 present Top 10 most frequent POS tags and
their proportions in the socio-emotional question set and the
informational question set, respectively. Note that the POS
tags shown in Tables 4 and 5 are defined in the Penn
Treebank tag set (Marcus et al.,1993). Comparing Table 5
and 6, we can see that the POS tags are not distributed
consistently in the two sets.
Tag Description %
NN Noun, singular or mass 11.83
PP Personal pronoun 9.61
IN
Preposition or subordinating
conjunction 7.82
RB Adverb 6.68
DT Determiner 5.88
JJ Adjective 5.56
VBD Verb, past tense 5.22
CC Coordinating conjunction 4.69
VB Verb, base form 4.35
NNS Noun, plural 4.22
Table 4 Top 10 POS tags and their proportions in socioemotional
questions
Tag Description %
NN Noun, singular or mass 13.62
IN Preposition or subordinating 8.24
conjunction
DT Determiner 6.79
JJ Adjective 6.77
NNS Noun, plural 6.24
PP Personal pronoun 5.50
RB Adverb 5.05
CC Coordinating conjunction 4.24
VB Verb, base form 3.94
VBP
Verb, present tense, not 3rd
person singular 3.91
Table 5 Top 10 POS tags and their proportions in
informational questions
In order to further examine the differences in tag
distributions between the two sets of questions, we did a
pairwise comparison by calculating the following value for
each tag:
where Ps
T is the proportion of the given tag T in the socioemotional
question set (i.e., the number of occurrences of
the tag divided by the total counts of all the tags in the set),
and Pi
T is the proportion of the tag in the informational
question set. As the result, the tags that appear more often
(in a higher proportion) in socio-emotional questions have
positive values, while negative values are given to the tags
appear more in informational questions. Figure 2 shows the
value of S for different POS tags. POS tags that appear less
than 0.2% in both sets were removed from the figure.
Figure 2. POS tag distribution
Several observations can be made in Figure 2:
Words in the noun class: Socio-emotional questions contain
more pronouns. Both personal pronoun and possessive
pronoun show a much higher proportion in socio-emotional
questions. Proper nouns (both plural and singular) and
common nouns, on the other hand, tend to be more frequent
in informational questions.
Verbs and verb tenses: Past tense verbs are distinctively
more frequent in socio-emotional questions. The high
relative frequency of past tense in socio-emotional question
suggests that the askers’ attention was focused on past
events in describing their situation. In informational
questions, present tense, gerund and verbs combined with
modal auxiliary (e.g. can, could, may, should, will)
appeared more often. Comparing the relative frequencies of
VBZ (verb, present tense, third person singular) and VBP
(verb, present tense, not third person singular), we can see
informational questions tend to use more third person verbs,
which may indicate objective description rather than
subjective narrative. Conversely, when the present tense is
used in socio-emotional questions, it is written from the
viewpoint of the questioners themselves (first person) or of
the audience (second person).
Interrogative words: There is also a difference in the use of
interrogative words. While Socio-emotional questions have
more Wh-adverb (e.g. how, where, why), informational
questions have more Wh-pronoun (e.g. what, who, whom).
Wh-determiner (e.g. which, whichever, what, whatever) is
also high in informational questions.
Prepositions and conjunctions: It is not surprising that
socio-emotional questions contain more connective words,
considering that they tend to be longer than informational
questions in our dataset. However, a slight, but notable
difference was found in the use of prepositions and
conjunctions in the two question sets. While coordinating
conjunctions appear more in socio-emotional questions,
prepositions or subordinating conjunctions are used more
often in informational questions. This finding is important
because the use of preposition and conjunction words is
connected to some important properties of text such as
narrative structure, cognitive complexity, or clarity [more in
Discussion].
Sentiment analysis
This part of the analysis concerns itself with the extent to
which subjective views and emotions are expressed in
questions. The level of subjectivity and the overall
sentiment in a question is measured with a pre-complied list
of subjective terms with the polarity sign
(positive/negative).
At first, for each question, the number of occurrences of
positive and negative terms from the list was counted.
Considering the variations in question lengths, the simple
counts were then divided by the length of the question (the
total number of words after removing stopwords), showing
the fraction of negative/positive terms within the given
question. These were called negative/positive scores. Using
the positive and negative scores, two compound measures
were defined. The subjectivity score, which is calculated
simply by summing the positive score and the negative
score for a given question, measures the extent to which the
question contains subjective or emotional expressions.
Sentiment score, on the other hand, represents the sentiment
orientation of a question, i.e. whether the question overall is
positive or negative. Sentiment score is calculated by
subtracting the negative score from the positive score. A
negative value of sentiment score indicates that there are
more negative terms than positive terms in a given question.
The larger the sentiment score value, the more positively
oriented the question is.
Table 6 shows the average scores for all four measures –
negative, positive, sentiment, subjectivity – for each
question set. To compare the means between the two sets, ttest
was done with the Welch correction of nonhomogeneity
of variance.
Socioemotional
Informational t (df)
Negative
score
0.184 0.137 3.02 (21.50) **
Positive
score
0.113 0.118 -0.37 (22.34)
Subjectivity 0.298 0.255 2.24 (23.21)*
Sentiment -0.070 -0.019 -2.55 (20.63)*
* p < .05 **p < .01.
Table 6. Score comparison between the two sets
Overall, regardless of question categories, the fraction of
negative words in a question turned out to be higher than
that of positive terms (negative score of 0.184 vs. positive
score of 0.113 in socio-emotional questions; negative score
of 0.137 vs. positive score of 0.118 in informational
questions). This might be simply a reflection of the fact that
the lexicon itself includes a longer list of negative terms to
be matched. Comparing the two question types, it becomes
apparent that socio-emotional questions contain much more
negative terms and less positive terms. The difference in the
use of positive terms is significant at p < .01. This tendency
is confirmed again in the compound measure of sentiment
score. Although both socio-emotional questions and
informational questions have negative values (meaning that
the fraction of negative words is larger than the fraction of
positive words in the questions), the magnitude is more than
3 times larger in socio-emotional questions. Therefore, we
can conclude that, on average, informational questions are
more positively oriented compared to socio-emotional
questions.
Another striking observation here is the high volume of
emotion words, indicated by a high subjectivity score, in
both question sets. The subjectivity score of a question, as
defined above, shows the fraction of both positive and
negative words out of the total count of words (excluding
stopwords) in the question. On average, about 30% of terms
in socio-emotional questions and 25.5% of terms in
informational questions are subjective (emotional) terms.
Pennebaker et al. (2003) provides a point of reference for a
comparison with other kinds of texts with regard to the
degree of emotional expressions. According to them, “in
daily speech, emotional writing, and even affect-laden
poetry, less than 5% of the words people use can be
classified as emotional” (p. 571). This number, 5%,
however, cannot be directly compared to our subjectivity
score because it is most likely that they meant the
percentage of emotion words over the entire text, without
removing stopwords. To make the numbers comparable, we
revisit the original length of each question before removing
stopwords, and recalculate the fraction of emotion
(sentiment) words (both positive and negative) with respect
to the original length. The result shows that emotional
words account for about 8.9% of words in socio-emotional
questions and about 10% of words in informational
questions on average (note that the percentage of emotional
words is now higher in informational questions. It is due to
the fact that, as shown in Table 1, socio-emotional
questions contain a lot more stopwords). As can be seen,
the new percentages in our question sets are still much
higher that the number (5%) mentioned in Pennebaker et al
(2003). While some of this difference may be attributed to
the difference in the lexicon of emotional/sentiment words
used in the analysis, it is still reasonable to conclude that
emotional expressions are abundant in our dataset
exceeding the level usually observed in other texts.
DISCUSSION
Using simple text analysis methods, we examined linguistic
content, linguistic style, and emotional expressions in two
different categories of eating disorder questions from
Yahoo! Answers. In the following we will summarize some
of the main findings and their implications.
The most frequent terms in our dataset correspond to the
contributing factors of eating disorder surveyed in medical
literature. Studies of eating disorders commonly report
family dynamics (e.g. dysfunctional family, controlling or
neglecting parents, communication issues) and peer
influence as one of the most important factors leading to the
development and persistence of eating disorders (Leon et
al., 1994; Polivy & Herman, 2002). In the socio-emotional
question set, terms denoting family relations as well as
peers appear highly frequently. It is interesting to note that
informational questions contain more terms that are related
to some widely known socio-cultural factors of eating
disorders (e.g. media influence, idealization of thinness,
promotion of certain body image through celebrities or
fashion models). It appears that while socio-emotional
questions address more personal aspects, informational
questions concerns more objective and depersonalized view
of the issues.
The result of the POS analysis also leads to a similar
inference. First, the use of words in the noun class shows a
sizable difference between two question sets, with a much
higher proportion of personal pronouns in socio-emotional
questions, and a clear profusion of general nouns in
informational questions. Second, socio-emotional questions
are written predominantly in the past tense, and when
written in the present tense, it is more often to talk about the
questioners themselves (first person) or to address the
audience (second person). In contrast, informational
questions tend to use more third person verbs, suggesting
relatively neutral or disengaged attitudes. In addition, while
social questions tend to be longer and more verbose,
connecting multiple ideas using coordinating conjunction
words (e.g. and, but, so, yet), informational questions tend
to include more specifications or detailed explanation about
the information being sought, as evidenced by the abundant
use of prepositions and subordinating conjunctions. These
results, taken together, suggest that socio-emotional
questions show similar characteristics to that of personal
narratives and informational questions have traits of
objective and precise writing. This observation is also
corroborated by the results of sentiment analysis, in which
socio-emotional questions turned out to have a significantly
higher subjectivity score.
We found that emotions appear abundant in eating disorder
questions in general, regardless of the question type, but
negative emotion words are clearly more dominant in socioemotional
questions. Taken with the observation of the
heavy use of past-tense verbs in socio-emotional questions,
this finding indicates that questioners often share the past
emotional experiences that are related, in their mind, to
their current health issues. Rime et al. (2002), in their study
of social sharing of emotions, explained why people share
emotional experiences with others. Drawing on the
cognitive dissonance theory (Festinger, 1960), they claimed
that sharing emotions gives people an opportunity to work
through their experiences and to gain a new cognitive view
of their problem situation. They also noted social functions
of sharing emotions, including an increased sense of
bonding and social support. Our findings of the language
use in socio-emotional questions suggest that in many cases
these questions are not about seeking information or helps
related to the given health issue per se, but rather about
expressing their own thoughts and emotions in search for an
explanation for their health problems.
In our previous study, we observed that there exists a wide
array of social, informational, and affective needs
manifested in the eating disorder questions posted to Social
Q&A. We argued that social Q&A may serve as a ground
for teens and young adults to work out their problems in a
variety of ways including venting emotions, reflecting on
their experiences, and looking for solutions (Bowler et al.,
2012). The results of the current study further demonstrate
distinctive characteristics of questions in different
categories, which we believe reflect the nature of
underlying needs, and support the previous finding.
The different characteristics of questions found in this study
highlight potential values of this data in various areas and,
at the same time, point to a need for looking at the
questions from different angles. As discussed above, our
analysis uncovered that the common linguistic features
shown in personal narratives appear in many questions,
especially in the socio-emotional category. In those
questions, users not only express their information needs (in
a broad sense), but often put them in context by explaining
their personal situations. This kind of question can be a
valuable source for gaining insights on personal and
contextual factors affecting health information seeking
behavior. On the other hand, the long list of terms that are
significantly more frequent in informational questions
indicates that informational questions vary more in their
contents. This suggests that informational questions may be
more useful in probing the kinds of information being
sought in relation to eating disorders or the range of issues
associated with eating disorders in teens’ mind than socioemotional
questions.
Although interesting findings were made, this study has its
limitations. First and foremost, the dataset analyzed in this
study is small in size and unbalanced in the composition of
question categories. As this study set out to be an initial
exploration, we chose the small set of the longest text-rich
questions. These questions may well not be representative
of all eating disorder questions from Yahoo! Answers, let
alone other sites. It remains to be studied whether the
distinctive characteristics we found in this particular set
would generally present in a larger set that also includes
much shorter questions. Second, our language analysis was
admittedly at a crude level and left some aspects of word
use unexplored. For instance, in previous linguistic studies,
meaningful differences were shown in the use of different
kinds of personal pronouns (e.g. first person singular, first
person plural, second person, third person), yet our analysis
did not differentiate them. We found that the overall use of
personal pronouns appeared to be higher for socioemotional
questions, but further examination may uncover
differential use of these words by their kind.
CONCLUSION
Social Q&A provides the possibility of looking into how
people verbally express their information needs in natural
language. In this study, we analyzed the linguistic
properties of different types of questions on the topic of
eating disorders.
One of the main purposes of this study was to assess the
applicability and effectiveness of the linguistic approach to
our study of health information seeking in social Q&A. The
results of this study demonstrate that the combination of
simple text analytic techniques reveals much about the
linguistic characteristics associated with different kinds of
questions, and thereby sheds lights on the nature of the
needs underneath the questions.
Given the promising results and with the ideas on further
sophistication of our approach obtained from this study, we
have started to expand this study with a larger dataset,
addressing the limitations of this study. There are a number
of possible directions for further exploration. Due to the
small size of the dataset in this study, we imposed a binary
distinction of questions over our detailed taxonomy of
eating disorder questions. A larger dataset would allow us
to examine the thematic and linguistic features at the subcategory
level. We also intend to analyze the language use
in answers along with the questions, and see what patterns
may emerge, whether and how they differ across question
types, and what they tell us about answers and answerers.
REFERENCES
Boals, A. (2005). Word use in emotional narratives about
failed romantic relationships and subsequent mental
health. Journal of Language and Social Psychology,
24(3), 252-268.
Bowler, L., Oh, J. S., He, D., Mattern, E., & Jeng, W.
(2012). Eating disorder questions in yahoo! Answers:
Information, conversation, or reflection? In Proceedings
of the Annual Meeting of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology.
Chou, W. -Y. S., Hunt, Y. M., Beckjord, E. B., Moser, R.
P., & Hesse, B. W. (2009). Social media use in the united
states: Implications for health communication. Journal of
Medical Internet Research, 11(4).
Chou, W. -Y. S., Hunt, Y., Folkers, A., & Augustson, E.
(2011). Cancer survivorship in the age of youtube and
social media: A narrative analysis. Journal of Medical
Internet Research, 13(1).
Chung, C. K., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2007). The
psychological function of function words. Social
Communication: Frontiers of Social Psychology, 343-
359. .
Denecke, K., & Nejdl, W. (2009). How valuable is medical
social media data? Content analysis of the medical web.
Information Sciences, 179(12), 1870-1880.
Evert, S. (2005). The Statistics of Word Cooccurrences:
Word Pairs and Collocations. Ph.D. thesis, Institut für
maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, University of Stuttgart.
Gazan, R. (2011). Social Q&A. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 62(12),
2301-2312.
Harper, F. M., Moy, D., & Konstan, J. A. (2009). Facts or
friends?: Distinguishing informational and conversational
questions in social Q&A sites. In Proceedings of the 27th
international conference on human factors in computing
systems (pp. 759-768).
Hu, M., & Liu, B. (2004). Mining and summarizing
customer reviews. In Proceedings of the tenth ACM
SIGKDD international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining (pp. 168-177).
Jaloba, A. (2009). The club no one wants to join: Online
behaviour on a breast cancer discussion forum. First
Monday, 14(7-6).
Katzman, D.K., Kanbur, N.O., and Steinegger, C.M.
(2010). “Medical screening and management of eating
disorders in adolescents.” In W.S. Agras (ed.), The
Oxford handbook of eating disorders, (267-291). New
York: Oxford University Press.
Keel, P.K. (2010). “Epidemiology and course of eating
disorders.” In W.S. Agras (ed.), The Oxford handbook of
eating disorders (25-32). New York: Oxford University
Press.
Lambert, S. D., & Loiselle, C. G. (2007). Health
information seeking behavior. Qualitative Health
Research, 17(8), 1006-19.
Leon, G. R., Fulkerson, J. A., Perry, C. L., & Dube, A.
(1994). Family influences, school behaviors, and risk for
the later development of an eating disorder. Journal of
Youth and Adolescence, 23(5), 499-515.
Li, B., Liu, Y., & Agichtein, E. (2008). CoCQA: Cotraining
over questions and answers with an application
to predicting question subjectivity orientation. In
Proceedings of the conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing (pp. 937-946).
Liu, B. (2010). Sentiment analysis and subjectivity.
Handbook of Natural Language Processing, 627-666.
Liu, F., Antieau, L. D., & Yu, H. (2011). Toward automated
consumer question answering: Automatically separating
consumer questions from professional questions in the
healthcare domain. Journal of Biomedical Informatics,
44(6), 1032-8.
Marcus, M. P., Marcinkiewicz, M. A., & Santorini, B.
(1993). Building a large annotated corpus of english: The
penn treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19(2), 313-
330.
Nahl, D. (2007). The centrality of the affective in
information behavior. In D. Nahl & D. Bilal (Eds.),
Information and emotion: The emergent affective
paradigm in information behavior research and theory
(pp. 3-37). Medford, NJ: Information Today.
Neumark-Sztainer, D. and Hannan, P.J. (2000). “Weightrelated
behaviors among adolescent girls and boys:
Results from a national survey.” Archives of Pediatrics &
Adolescent Medicine 154(6): 569-577.
Pang, B., & Lee, L. (2008). Opinion mining and sentiment
analysis. Foundations and Trends in Information
Retrieval, 2(1-2), 1-135. .
Pennebaker, J. W., Mehl, M. R., & Niederhoffer, K. G.
(2003). Psychological aspects of natural language use:
Our words, our selves. Annual Review of Psychology,
54(1), 547-577.
Polivy, J., & Herman, C. P. (2002). Causes of eating
disorders. Annu. Rev. Psychol, 53, 187-213.
Ressler, P. K., Bradshaw, Y. S., Gualtieri, L., & Chui, K. K.
H. (2012). Communicating the experience of chronic pain
and illness through blogging. Journal of Medical Internet
Research, 14(5).
Rideout, V. (2001). Generation RX.com: How young people
use the internet for health information. Henry Kaiser
Family Foundation: Menlo Park, CA. Available at
http://www.kff.org/entmedia/20011211a-index.cfm
(retrieved on September 4, 2011).
Rimé, B., Corsini, S., & Herbette, G. (2002). Emotion,
verbal expression, and the social sharing of emotion. In S.
R. Fussell (Ed.), The verbal communication of emotions:
Interdisciplinary perspectives (pp. 185-208). Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Robillard, J. M., Whiteley, L., Johnson, T. W., Lim, J.,
Wasserman, W. W., & Illes, J. (2013). Utilizing social
media to study information-seeking and ethical issues in
gene therapy. Journal of Medical Internet Research,
15(3), e44.
Russell, J. A. (1980). A circumplex model of affect.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39(6),
1161-1178.
Schmid, H. (1994). Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging
using decision trees. In Proceedings of international
conference on new methods in language processing (Vol.
12, pp. 44-49).
Stone, P. J., Dunphy, D. C., & Smith, M. S. (1966). The
general inquirer: A computer approach to content
analysis. In Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Taboada, M., Brooke, J., Tofiloski, M., Voll, K., & Stede,
M. (2011). Lexicon-based methods for sentiment
analysis. Computational Linguistics, 37(2), 267-307.
Tausczik, . R., & Pennebaker, . W. (2010). The
psychological meaning of words: LIWC and
computerized text analysis methods. Journal of Language
and Social Psychology, 29(1), 24-54.
Thelwall, M., Wilkinson, D., & Uppal, S. (2010). Data
mining emotion in social network communication:
Gender differences in myspace. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 61(1),
190-199.
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J., & Hoffmann, P. (2005). Recognizing
contextual polarity in phrase-level sentiment analysis. In
Proceedings of the conference on human language
technology and empirical methods in natural language
processing (pp. 347-354).
Zickuhr, K. (2010). Generations 2010. Washington D.C.:
Pew Internet & American Life Project. Available at
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2010/Generations-
2010.aspx (retrieved on March 4, 2013).
Copyright of Proceedings of the Association for Information Science & Technology is the
property of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple
sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.