A proof of concept personalized music player for persons
with Alzheimer’s Disease
Marc Stoeckle
Alumni
University of British Columbia, The iSchool, 1961
East Mall, Vancouver, BC Canada V6T 1Z1
Marc.stoeckle@ubc.ca
Luanne Freund
University of British Columbia, The iSchool, 1961
East Mall, Vancouver, BC Canada V6T 1Z1
Luanne.freund@ubc.ca
ABSTRACT
Numerous studies have shown that persons diagnosed with
mild to severe Alzheimer’s disease exhibit positive
reactions when listening to familiar music. Results show
that the disease spares musical memory in comparison to
other memory parts of the brain until very late stages of
Alzheimer’s. This project explores the potential of a
minimal user-interface design prototype for smart devices
that relies upon simple user interactions, i.e. browsing and
skipping, to identify and retrieve familiar and preferred
music. We report on the results of a small Wizard of Oz
study that provides support for the initial design concept
and input to the next round of the design cycle. Most
participants were able to interact with the device and to
quickly identify preferred music that provided a useful
starting point for collaborative filtering-based
recommendations.
Keywords
music information retrieval, Alzheimer’s, dementia,
memory recollection, personalized music.
INTRODUCTION
A number of studies have demonstrated that persons
diagnosed with mild to severe Alzheimer disease show
signs of positive reactions when listening to familiar music
(Cuddy & Duffin, 2005; Cuddy et al., 2012; Halpern &
O'Connor, 2000). Dementia patients can benefit from
listening to individualized music during music therapy by
becoming less agitated, depressed and stressed, by
remembering personal facts, becoming approachable and
responsive, among other outcomes (Clement, Tonini,
Khatir, Schiaratura, & Samson, 2012; Cooke, Moyle,
Shum, & Murfield, 2010; Gerdner, 2010).
However, current approaches to identifying the music
preferences of dementia patients are burdensome, including
the use of questionnaires and interviews with patients,
family members and care givers (Gerdner, 2010).
Motivated by research by Lancioni et al (2014), showing
that simple technology aids can be used by individuals with
Alzheimer’s disease, we undertook the design of a
personalized music application that would provide a
lightweight approach to identifying and retrieving familiar
music.
Such an application would be useful for caregivers and
family members, and as an ultimate goal, be suitable for
personal use by Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) patients as a
means to listen to their favorite music. The autonomy
afforded by the application would make it a cost-effective
supplement to therapy and medical treatment, and would be
beneficial for AD patients as well as their families, spouses,
and caregivers (Buettner et al., 2010). The goals of the
study reported here were to investigate the factors that must
be taken into consideration in the design of such an
application and to establish proof of concept. Therefore,
this study proposes and tests a minimal user-interface
design prototype for smart devices that relies upon simple
user interactions, i.e. browsing and skipping, to identify and
retrieve familiar and preferred music.
PREVIOUS RESEARCH
Previous studies in the fields of neuropsychology,
neurology, music therapy, music information retrieval,
computer science, digital humanities and psychogeriatrics
have examined the effects of listening to familiar music on
AD patients’. For example, work by Cuddy et al. (2005,
2012) shows that long-term familiarity with melodies is
prevalent across levels of dementia, including the severe
stage for some individuals. Persons with mild, and some
with moderate, dementia detected melodic distortions
within the normal performance range of older adults. To see
whether the exposure to music can actually enhance the
production of self-defining memories, i.e. memories that
contribute to self-discovery, self-understanding, and
identity, Haj, et al. (2015) played specific music to study
participants. They found that autobiographical recall is
enhanced in AD patients when they are exposed to
ASIST 2016, October 14-18, 2016, Copenhagen, Denmark.
[Authors Retain Copyright.]
personalized music in comparison with silence or music
chosen by the researcher.
In considering the design of a music player system for AD
patients, there is an extensive body of relevant research on
music retrieval and recommender systems, including
collaborative and content-based systems that filter based on
skipping behavior and body movement. For example,
Pampalk and Widmer (2005) propose a filtering system that
builds a profile based on user feedback gathered by a “skip”
button and Hoashi et al. (2003), propose content-based
filtering that retrieves songs based on the user’s genre
preferences and relevance feedback. Technology design for
AD patients presents challenges; however, research by
Lancioni et al. (2014) supports the notion that they are
capable of using specially designed technology to
independently select and listen to preferred music. A
similar study by Topo (2004) found that participants could
use a multimedia system to identify and listen to music. Our
approach builds on this previous work by proposing and
testing a lightweight tablet-based music player that
identified music preferences implicitly, based on user
interactions.
METHODS
Design of Prototype
The prototype for this study was implemented on an Apple
IPad 4 device using customizable, open source code
(HTML, CSS & Java Script) for a music player1. The
overall design concept was to keep the interface visually
appealing, but as simple as possible with respect to content
and interaction design. All unnecessary text, such as name
of the artist and music track was deleted. The interface
(Figure 1) shows the CD cover art of the music track that is
currently playing and the edges of the previously played
(left) and upcoming (right) songs. Covers showing images
of the musician/s were selected when possible to serve as a
secondary memory cue. The current selected song can be
played and paused by touching anywhere on the full-sized
cover; pressing on the left or right cover edge will play the
previous or next song. Swiping allows for backwards and
forward scrolling.
The playlist used for the music player application consisted
of 40 songs, of which 25 were popular, 10 classical and 5
North American folk songs. The songs were selected
because research on Alzheimer’s patients shows that the
symptoms of Alzheimer’s disease commonly occur at age
67 and higher. Research shows that songs, especially those
from the patients’ childhood and adolescence years, are
mostly remembered even until severe stages of Alzheimer’s
disease (Jacobsen et al., 2015; Cuddy et al., 2012; Fukui &
Toyoshima, 2008; Cuddy & Duffin, 2005).
Participants and Recruiting
Participants were selected through a purposive sampling
method from a pool of patients with age-related memory
1 Source: www.codepen.io
loss living at a special-needs, assisted-living care facility.
These individuals were not suffering from Alzheimer’s
disease, but were considered to be an appropriate proxy
sample for the early stages of interface testing. Participants
of age 60 and above who were considered capable of
participating in the study were identified with the help of
facility staff, invited, and voluntarily consented to take part.
In keeping with the recommendation of Nielson and
Landauer (1993), we recruited 5 participants (3 females, 2
male, aged 62 to 69). All five study participants indicated
that they had no previous experience in handling a tablet or
a similar device.
Figure 1: Music Player Prototype
Procedures
This cross-sectional study was conducted in a “Wizard of
Oz” style simulation (Kelly, 2009) in a quiet room in the
assisted-living facility with the researcher, the participant
and one care-giver present. The first step of the study
presented participants with the music player application on
a tablet. They received a brief tutorial, were given
headphones and asked to use the system. The participants
browsed and listened to songs included in the playlist and
decided when to play, forward or replay a song previous
heard. Based on the participant’s preferences with the
music player, the researcher then used Spotify, a
commercial music streaming platform, to obtain
recommendations and play additional songs. This was
followed by a very brief interview including basic
demographic questions (age, experience with technology,
favorite music) and questions about the participants’
experiences of using the system and of listening to the
music. Sessions were brief: on average 12 (range 8.5 to 16)
minutes.
Data was collected through direct observation, audio
recording, and screen capture. The largely qualitative data
was analyzed thematically to identify patterns of activity
and to extract instances of positive and negative
experiences with the prototype.
RESULTS
Music Recommendations
The study showed that, in most cases, the pre-generated
playlist in combination with collaborative-filtering on
Spotify allowed for a quick, interactive personalization and
determination of the participants’ music taste. Each
participant independently showed an emotional reaction to
some degree (singing along, smiling, remembering
childhood events, etc.) to one or several music pieces. For
example, Participant 1 reacted to Al Jolson – Swanee after
listening to it for a few seconds by saying out loud the
artist’s name. After further listening he exclaimed, “I go for
this for a while” and he recalled a movie he had seen about
Al Jolson. After listening to several songs, he said, “It is so
soothing. I am a very anxious person. That relaxes me.”
Using the artist Al Jolson as a search query in Spotify
resulted in several artists similar to Jolson, and Participant 1
enjoyed listening to those, saying that they were familiar,
although he did not remember the artist’s name.
Participant II clearly enjoyed listening to the rockabilly
songs included in the pre-generated playlist: Elvis Presley’s
Jailhouse Rock and Bill Hailey’s Rock Around the Clock.
He fully listed to both of these in contrast to several others
he skipped after listening to only a few seconds. Bill Hailey
was used in Spotify as a search query and the similar artists
recommended played to Participant II resulted in a positive
reaction in which he remembered events in his life. “Sure.
Great Music. Oh Johnny Be Good. Who is it? .... Chuck
Berry. Sure. I saw them live once…”.
Results were similar for Participants III and V who both
skipped through several songs to find two songs they
listened to almost completely. Participant III reacted to the
Hallelujah chorus from Handel’s Messiah with memories
from childhood and recollected “we always played this in
our family on Christmas time. Oh, it gives me thrills” and
“Christmas time was a special time for us children seeing
my dad playing Beethoven, Mozart and Bach”. Participant
V reacted strongly to Procol Harum – A Whiter Shade of
Pale and started to sing the lyrics along with the song. In
Part 2 of the session, the recommended artists and songs
created reactions such as “Yeah, yeah I like that one.
Teacher never leave us alone” and “Yes. It is fantastic”.
The case with Participant IV was somewhat different, as
she rejected the playlist after moving quickly through three
songs, saying she wanted to listen to folk songs from
Germany, as she was born and grew up there. When we
played German folk songs on Spotify, she reacted with
excitement and started to hum the melody energetically.
She laughed and asked in German: “Are we going to
dance?”
Interaction Design
All five participants had, to their own account, never used a
tablet and several issues were observed with the
functionality of the music player. The swiping and tapping
functions were challenging for participants. All participants
tapped the touchscreen slowly and left their finger on the
touchscreen to select an action. Several interventions by the
researcher and the care giver slowly resulted in the correct
motion of tapping the touchscreen and four of the five
participants were capable of using the application
independently by the end of the session.
Other issues observed included a lack of understanding of
the backward scrolling function of the player, using the
previous CD-Cover image, even after several attempts to
clarify. However, using the current CD-Covers as the main
selectors was quickly understood by participants. Also, the
stand-by mode of the tablet created confusion several times
as the display suddenly turned off during the process of
listening to a song. Despite these issues, participants
expressed comfort and interest in using the application in
the post session interviews. One participant stated: “I sure
would enjoy listening to music with this, because I can’t
remember the artists name but I can remember the tune.”
DISCUSSION
Findings suggest that it may be possible to identify
individualized music for dementia patients quickly and
easily without the use of interviews and questionnaires.
Despite widely varying musical tastes, participants quickly
found music they enjoyed and, while listening, showed
signs of emotional wellbeing (Clement et al., 2012), singing
along to familiar melodies, and even episodic memory
(Cuddy et al., 2012). This was a very limited study that
included participants with age-related memory loss rather
than Alzheimer’s disease, so the results are merely
suggestive. However, we consider the results promising and
we intend to develop the next iteration of the music player
that would incorporate a user profile derived from
interaction with the initial playlist and a recommendation
engine.
Study results suggest that the interface design can be
simplified further by removing the option to scroll back.
Given that there are only a small number of songs in the
playlist loop, users can scroll forward only and still relocate
songs. Further testing is needed to adjust the sensitivity of
the touch interface, which may need to be reduced for
optimal handling by this population. Results suggest that
patterns of listening and skipping behavior could be used to
as input to a filter or personalization profile (Pamplak &
Widmer, 2005). Looking forward we are investigating
implicit interaction methods such as reading body
movement (Godoy & Jensenius, 2009) or facial
expressions. (Kumari et al., 2015) A built-in camera could
read facial expressions such as anger, disgust or happiness
and a recognition filter could determine whether a song
should be skipped or not. Accordingly, an in-built camera
could read body movements such as calm or agitated based
upon which a filter decides to skip or keep playing a song.
This type of approach would have the most potential value
for AD patients in the severe stage who may be unable to
use even the simplest of direct interaction techniques.
One observed limitation of the current prototype is its
cultural bias, as the selection playlist is based on the North
American “top hits” lists. An interesting design challenge
for such systems is a culturally neutral means of eliciting
music preferences. However, the simplest approach in the
meantime may be to develop a range of pre-generated
playlists to accommodate the cultural diversity of the user
population.
CONCLUSION
This preliminary study showed that a music player
application with a minimal user-interface has the potential
to be used independently by dementia patients. In general,
study participants showed eagerness to learn the application
and enthusiasm for listening to music with it. Further, the
study showed that without asking study participants, care
givers or family members, it was possible to determine their
musical preferences based solely upon their interactions
with a brief, predetermined music playlist. The results of
this study will inform the next design phase of this
prototype.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thank you to the study participants for their time and
engagement, to the staff of the senior's residence where we
carried out the study, and to Cassie McFadden who assisted
with the study.
REFERENCES
Buettner, L. L., Yu, F., & Burgener, S. C. (2010). Evidence
Supporting Technology-Based Interventions for
People with Early-Stage Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal
of Gerontological Nursing, 36(10), 15–19.
Clement, S., Tonini, A., Khatir, F., Schiaratura, L., &
Samson, S. (2012). Short and Longer Term Effects of
Musical Intervention in Severe Alzheimer's Disease.
Music Perception: an Interdisciplinary Journal, 29(5),
533–541.
Cooke, M. L., Moyle, W., Shum, D. H. K., & Murfield, H.
J. E. (2010). A randomized controlled trial exploring
the effect of music on agitated behaviours and anxiety
in older people with dementia. Aging and Mental
Health, 14(8), 905–916.
Cuddy, L. L., & Duffin, J. (2005). Music, memory, and
Alzheimer’s disease: is music recognition spared in
dementia, and how can it be assessed? Medical
Hypotheses, 64(2), 229–235.
Cuddy, L. L., Duffin, J., Gill, S. S., Brown, C. L., Sikka, R.,
& Vanstone, A. D. (2012). Memory for Melodies and
Lyrics in Alzheimer's Disease. Music Perception: an
Interdisciplinary Journal, 29(5), 479–491.
Fukui, H., & Toyoshima, K. (2008). Music facilitate the
neurogenesis, regeneration and repair of neurons.
Medical Hypotheses, 71(5), 765–769.
Gerdner, L. A. (2010). Individualized Music for Elders with
Dementia. Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 36(6),
1–15.
Godoy, R. I., & Jensenius, A. R. (2009). Body Movement
in Music information retrieval (pp. 45–50). Presented
at the 10th International Society for Music Information
Retrieval Conference.
Haj, El, M., Antoine, P., Nandrino, J. L., Gély-Nargeot, M.-
C., & Raffard, S. (2015). Self-defining memories
during exposure to music in Alzheimer's disease.
International Psychogeriatrics , 27 (10), 1719–1730.
Halpern, A. R., & O'Connor, M. G. (2000). Implicit
memory for music in Alzheimer's disease.
Neuropsychology, 14(3), 391–397.
Hoashi, K., Matsumoto, K., & Inoue, N. (2003).
Personalization of User Profiles for Content-based
Music Retrieval Based on Relevance Feedback, 1–10.
Jacobsen, J.-H., Stelzer, J., Fritz, T. H., Chételat, G., La
Joie, R., & Turner, R. (2015). Why musical memory
can be preserved in advanced Alzheimer’s disease.
Brain, 138(8), 2438–2450.
Kelly, D. (2009). Methods for Evaluating Interactive
Information Retrieval Systems with Users.
Foundations and Trends® in Information Retrieval,
3(1—2), 1–224.
Kumari, J., Rajesh, R., & Pooja, K. M. (2015). Facial
Expression Recognition: A Survey. Procedia -
Procedia Computer Science, 58, 486–491.
Lancioni, G. E., Singh, N. N., O’Reilly, M. F., Sigafoos, J.,
Renna, C., Pinto, K., et al. (2014). Research in
Developmental Disabilities Persons with moderate
Alzheimer’s disease use simple technology aids to
manage daily activities and leisure occupation.
Research in Developmental Disabilities, 35(9), 2117–
2128.
Nielsen, Jakob, and Landauer, Thomas K.: "A mathematical
model of the finding of usability problems,"
Proceedings of ACM INTERCHI'93 Conference
(Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 24-29 April 1993), pp.
206-213.
Pampalk, E., & Widmer, G. (2005). Dynamic playlist
generation based on skipping behavior (pp. 634–637).
Presented at the 10th International Society for Music
Information Retrieval Conference.
Topo, P. (2004). Assessment of a Music-Based Multimedia
Program for People with Dementia. Dementia, 3 (3),
331–350.
Copyright of Proceedings of the Association for Information Science & Technology is the
property of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple
sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.