1
Exploring Cultural Differences in Language Usage:
The Case of Negation
Svetlozara Stoytcheva
Graduate School of Library &
Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign
501 E. Daniel Street,
Champaign, IL 61820
stytchv2@illinois.edu
Dov Cohen
Department of Psychology
University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign
603 E. Daniel Street,
Champaign, IL 61820
dovcohen@illinois.edu
Catherine Blake
Graduate School of Library &
Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign
501 E. Daniel Street,
Champaign, IL 61820
clblake@illinois.edu
ABSTRACT
Prior research suggests that speakers of Asian languages are
more likely to use negation than English speakers. Our goal
in this work is to explore this theory using empirical data
from news stories. Specifically, we used natural language
processing to compare negation usage in two newspapers:
the New York Times and Xinhua News (English Edition).
Overall, negation represents 0.55% of typed dependencies
in the New York Times (versus 0.18% in Xinhua News).
Additionally, 9.28% of sentences and 86.56% of articles in
the New York Times contain one or more instances of
negation (compared to 3.33% of sentences and 24.94% of
articles in Xinhua News). In contrast to the prevalent theory,
negation is approximately three times more common in the
New York Times than in Xinhua News (English Edition).
Keywords
Text mining, natural language processing, language &
culture.
INTRODUCTION
Prior research in social psychology indicates language use
is strongly influenced by cultural backgrounds. This can be
a function of different cultural syndromes (Triandis, 1994),
epistemologies (Nisbett, 2003), or semantic and
grammatical features of a language. There is some reason
to suspect this would be the case based on Asian
epistemologies that emphasize absence and negation more
than Western epistemologies do (Jullien, 2007), social
norms in a face culture that emphasize indirect rather than
direct communication (Triandis, 1994; Leung & Cohen,
2011), a prevention-focused orientation (emphasizing
failures to be avoided rather than successes to be achieved
(Lee, Aaker, & Gardner, 2000), and the less expansive
vocabulary of most Asian languages (as compared to
English).
Previous research in Dr. Cohen’s lab has confirmed that –
in the domain of morality – Asian language speakers prefer
that ethical injunctions be expressed in terms of what one
should not do (rather than what one should do). This
suggests that negation is more common in texts produced
by speakers of Asian languages.
One goal of this poster is to further explore these theories
using empirical data from new stories. Rather than hand
coding each story for the presence of linguistic features,
which is both time- and labor-intensive, we introduce
computational techniques that scale.
This poster outlines the application of natural language
processing methods to study the use of negation in a large
corpus of newspaper articles. We measured how frequently
negation occurs in approximately three years’ worth of
articles from the New York Times and Xinhua News
(English Edition). Based on the prior work, our hypothesis
was that negation would be more common in articles from
Xinhua News than in articles from the New York Times.
However, the opposite turns out to be true: negation is
roughly three times more frequent in the New York Times.
METHODS
The data used in this research comes from the AQUAINT
Corpus of English News Texts, which contains full-text
articles from the New York Times, the AP Newswire, and
Xinhua News (English Edition). The period of coverage is
1998-2000 (LDC, 2013). For another example of how this
data has been used for natural language processing
research, see Llorens et al. (2012).
All of the available articles in the collection were
considered in this analysis. After preprocessing to tokenize
the articles into sentences, the texts were parsed using
ASIS&T 2014 November 1-4, 2014, Seattle, WA, USA.
2
version 3.2 of the Stanford Natural Language Parser.1 For a
given sentence, the parser identifies the part of speech of
each word in the sentence, as well as the grammatical
relationships between words in the sentence. These
grammatical relationships are called typed dependencies.
Negation is one kind of typed dependency recognized by
the parser; it is identified by the presence of a negation
modifier: not, never, or the contraction nt or n’t. Figure 1
shows an example of a typed dependency tree generated by
the Stanford Parser for the sentence: “Print will not kill the
web.” De Marneffe et al. (2006) describe the rules
governing the parser’s dependency recognition and explain
the difference between the Stanford Parser’s typed
dependency schema and those used by other parsers. The
grammar rules used to program each parser affect its output
and none of the parsers are 100% accurate in their
assignment of dependency relationships. However, the
Stanford parser has been used successfully in a variety of
projects. For an example, see Lucic and Blake (2012). The
output of the typed dependency parser links each negation
modifier to the term being negated. We chose to use the
Stanford Parser–rather than simply counting the frequency
of negation words–in order to maintain this relationship
between negation modifiers and the context in which they
appear. We plan to take advantage of that contextual
information in future research.
The original sentences from the AQUAINT Corpus and the
results of the Stanford Parser were loaded into an Oracle
SQL Developer (version 3.2.20.09) database. Several
unique identifiers were assigned to link the parser output
and the original sentences. Finally, the records in the
database were queried using Structured Query Language
(SQL).
RESULTS
Our analysis consists of several comparisons of the two
texts. We considered some general attributes of the texts,
including number of articles, average article length, and
average dependencies per sentence. We counted the number
of discrete instances of negation, as well as the number of
distinct sentences and articles that contained one or more
1 See http://nlp.stanford.edu/software/lex-parser.shtml
negations. Overall, we found that negation occurs
approximately three times more frequently in the New York
Times.
Overview of the Data
Table 1 shows the total number of sentences and articles
available in the AQUAINT Corpus. Despite the availability
of a comparable number of articles from each newspaper,
considerably more data is available from the New York
Times. On average, New York Times articles are about five
times longer than articles from Xinhua News (approx. 54
sentences per article vs. 11 sentences per article).
Table 2 shows the total number of typed dependencies
identified by the Stanford Parser for each newspaper, as
well as the estimated ratio of dependencies per sentence.
Again, each typed dependency represents a unique
grammatical relationship in the text. As the average
numbers of dependencies per sentence for each dataset are
almost identical, we can infer that the grammatical
complexity of the two texts is comparable. Thus differences
in negation usage between the two collections cannot be
attributed to sentence complexity.
Newspaper Number of
sentences
Number of
articles
New York Times 16,923,893 313,291
Xinhua News
(English Edition) 3,431,663 290,243
Table 1 Total number of records in the data set.
Newspaper Number of
dependencies
Average
Dependencies
per sentence
New York Times 302,387,123 17.87
Xinhua News
(English Edition) 66,121,130 19.27
Table 2 Total number of dependencies in the data
Figure 2 Negation as a percentage of total
dependencies.
Figure 1 Example of a typed dependency
structure.
3
Overall Negation Frequency
Figure 2 illustrates the comparative frequency of overall
negations between the American and Chinese texts and
shows the number of negation typed dependencies as a
perctange of total dependencies. Articles in the New York
Times contain 1,677,916 unique instances of negation
(0.55% of total dependencies) and articles in the Xinhua
News containe 120,537 unique instances of negation
(0.18% of total dependencies). In both cases, negation
represents less than 1% of all grammatical relationships in
the text, which tells us that, in general, negation is not
commonly used in news stories. However, these results
show that authors of articles in the New York Times are
roughly 3 times more likely to use negation than Xinhua
News authors.
Sentences and Articles Containing Negation
Considering negation as a percentage of total typed
dependencies captures each unique instance of negation in
the text and highlights that negation is a relatively
uncommon grammatical phenomenon in this data set.
However, considering the number of distinct sentences and
articles in which negation appears is also informative. The
percentage of sentences from each newspaper containing
one or more negations is shown in Figure 3. In the New
York Times data, 1,569,823 distinct sentences (9.28% of
total sentences) contain at least one negation, while 114,191
distinct sentences (3.33% of total sentences) from Xinhua
News contain at least one negation. At the sentence level,
negation is approximately 2.8 times more common in the
New York Times.
Figure 4 shows the number of articles in each newspaper
that contain one or more instances of negation. 86.56% of
New York Times articles (271,180 distinct articles) and
24.94% of Xinhua News articles (72,388 distinct articles)
contain at least one instance of negation. Negation is
approximately 3.5 times more likely to occur in an article
from the New York Times than in one from Xinhua News.
This finding is consistent with the relative frequency of
sentences containing negation and total instances of
negation in the data. Overall, negation is significantly more
common in the New York Times than in Xinhua News.
CONCLUSION
Our findings are limited to the newspaper texts on which
they are based and the texts considered in this study are just
a sample of texts published in the United States and China.
Another limitation of this research is that it only considers
the English-language edition of Xinhua News. Additional
insights would be gained by analyzing the Chineselanguage
edition. This edition is not included in the
AQUAINT corpus, however a version of the Stanford
Dependency Parser for Chinese is available. For more
details see Chang et al. (2009).
Despite these limitations, the research methods outlined
above can be applied to additional text collections in order
to gain a better understanding of the way people from
different cultural backgrounds use language. This project is
a starting point for future work, including examining
(through a combination of close reading and other methods)
how negation functions in these texts and in what contexts
it appears. Additionally, in light of prior work in Dr.
Cohen’s lab, we plan to investigate the negation of terms
associated with ethical injunctions.
Prior research in the domain of social psychology has
shown that speakers of Asian languages are more likely to
use negation than English speakers. As such, we anticipated
finding more negation in articles from a Chinese newspaper
(Xinhua News [English Edition]) than from an American
newspaper (the New York Times). Negation was identified
by parsing a large collection of newspaper articles from the
AQUAINT Corpus using version 3.2 of the Stanford
Natural Language Parser. Negation was shown to be
roughly three times more common in the New York Times.
The prevalent theory suggests that Chinese authors would
use negation more frequently than American authors. Our
empirical results show that this theory does not hold in
news texts. Further research remains to be done to
determine how uses of negation differ in other social
contexts (formal vs. informal) or other genres of
communication, such as speech, fiction, or social media.
Figure 3 Percentage of sentences containing at least
one negation.
Figure 4 Percentage of articles that contain at least one
negation.
4
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Craig Evans, Senior Research
Programmer at the Graduate School of Library &
Information Science, University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign for his assistance with data processing and
analysis.
This research is made possible in part by a grant from the
U.S. Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS),
Laura Bush 21st Century Librarian Program Grant Number
RE-05-12-0054-12 Socio-technical Data Analytics
(SODA).
REFERENCES
Chang, P., Tseng, H., Jurafsky, D. & Manning, C. 2009.
Discriminative reordering with Chinese grammatical
relations features. Proceeding SSST '09 Proceedings of the
Third Workshop on Syntax and Structure in Statistical
Translation, 51-59. http://nlp.stanford.edu/pubs/ssst09-
chang.pdf
De Marneffe, M. C., MacCartney, B., & Manning, C. 2006.
Generating typed dependency parses from phrase structure
parses. Proceedings of the LREC, 6, 449-454.
http://nlp.stanford.edu/pubs/LREC06_dependencies.pdf
Jullien, F. (2007). The impossible nude: Chinese art and
western aesthetics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
LDC. (2013). The AQUAINT Corpus of English News
Texts. Linguistic Data Consortium Catalog. Retrieved
from: http://catalog.ldc.upenn.edu/LDC2002T31
Lee, A. Y., Aaker, J. L., & Gardner, W. L. (2000). The
pleasures and pains of distinct self-construals: the role of
interdependence in regulatory focus. Journal of
personality and social psychology, 78(6), 1122-1134. doi:
10.1037/0022-3514.78.6.1122
Leung, A. K.-Y., & Cohen, D. (2011). Within- and
between-culture variation: Individual differences and the
cultural logics of honor, face, and dignity cultures.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 100, 507–
526. doi: 10.1037/a0022151
Llorens, H., Saquete, E. and Navarro-Colorado, B. (2012),
Automatic system for identifying and categorizing
temporal relations in natural language. International
journal of intelligent systems, 27: 680–703.
doi: 10.1002/int.21542
Lucic, A. and Blake, C. 2012. Characterizing Authorship
Style Using Linguistic Features. Long paper presented at
the Digital Humanities conference, June 16-22, Hamburg,
Germany. Retrieved from: http://www.dh2012.unihamburg.
de/conference/programme/abstracts/characterizi
ng-authorship-style-using-linguistic-features/
Nisbett, R.E. (2003). The geography of thought: How
Asians and Westerners think differently… and why. New
York: Free Press.
Triandis, H.C. (1994). Culture and social behavior. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Copyright of Proceedings of the Association for Information Science & Technology is the
property of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple
sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission.
However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.